T otem and T aboo
‘Freud has told us that for him all natural science, medi-
cine, and psychotherapy were a lifelong journey roundand back to the early passion of his youth for thehistory of mankind, for the origins of religion and moral-ity – an interest which at the height of his career brokeout to such magniﬁcent effect in 
T otem and T aboo .’
Thomas Mann
‘Relations between social anthropology and psycho-
logy are still ill-deﬁned and unstable. But in any reso-l u t i o n  o f  t h e m  t h e  w o r k  o f  p s y c h o a n a l y s t s  m u s t  b etaken very seriously into account. It is very useful, then,to have this new translation of the pioneer work.’
Nature
‘ F r e u d  h a d  a  s t r o n g  e l e m e n t  o f  t h e  a r t i s t  i n  h i s  c o m -
position. Nearly all his work was well translated intoEnglish, with one glaring exception: 
T otem and T aboo .
N o w ,  a t  l a s t  ...  j u s t i c e  h a s  b e e n  d o n e ....  T h e  b o o kitself is one of the most fascinating and characteristic,and also of the most speculative, in the whole Freudiancanon.’
Books of the MonthSigmund
Freud
T otem and T aboo
Some Points of Agreement between the
Mental Lives of Savages and Neurotics
Authorized translation by James Strachey
London and New YorkFirst published 1913 by Hugo HellerEnglish edition ﬁrst published in the United Kingdom 1919by George Routledge & SonsThis translation ﬁrst published 1950 by Routledge & Kegan PaulFirst published in Routledge Classics 2001by Routledge11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EERoutledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
Translation © 1950 Routledge & Kegan PaulAll rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprintedor reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafterinvented, including photocopying and recording, or inany information storage or retrieval system, withoutpermission in writing from the publishers.British Library Cataloguing in Publication DataA catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0–415–25387–XThis edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2004.
ISBN 0-203-16470-9 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-25893-2 (Adobe eReader Format)
(Print Edition)CONTENTS
Translator’s Note vii
Preface ix
Preface to the Hebrew Translation xiii
1 The Horror of Incest 1
2 Taboo and Emotional Ambivalence 21
3 Animism, Magic and the Omnipotence of
Thoughts 87
4 The Return of Totemism in Childhood 116
List of Works referred to in the Text 188
Index 195TRANSLATOR’S NOTE
As Freud explains in his own preface, the four essays comprised
in this volume were originally published in the pages of theperiodical Imago (Vienna) under the title ‘Über einige Überein-
stimmungen im Seelenleben der Wilden und der Neurotiker’[‘On Some Points of Agreement between the Mental Lives ofSavages and Neurotics’]—the ﬁrst and second essays in Vol. I
(1912) and the third and fourth in Vol. II (1913). All four essayswere collected and published under the new title of T otem und T abu
in 1913 (Vienna, Hugo Heller). New editions appeared in 1920,1922 and 1934 and the work was included in Volume X o f
Freud’s Gesammelte Schriften  (Vienna, 1924) and as Volume IX of
his Gesammelte Werke  (London, 1940). None of these later editions
show any variations of substance from the original one. An Eng-lish translation by A. A. Brill was published in New York in 1918(London, 1919). The book has also been translated into Hun-garian (1918), Spanish (1923), Portuguese ( n.d.), French (1924),
Japanese (twice, 1930 and 1934) and Hebrew (1939). The lastof these was introduced by a specially written preface, which,on account of its particular interest, I have included in this
volume.
For the purposes of the present, entirely new, version I have
made an e ﬀort to verify all quotations and references so far as
possible; and I have put right a considerable number of inaccur-acies which had crept into the German editions. Particulars of allworks referred to in the text will be found in a list at the end ofthe volume. The responsibility for any matter printed betweensquare brackets is mine.
My grateful thanks are due to Miss Anna Freud for her critical
revision of the entire translation, and to Mr. Roger Money-Kyrlefor reading through the typescript and making many helpfulsuggestions.
J. S.translator’s note viiiPREFACE
The four essays that follow were originally published (under a
heading which serves as the present book’s sub-title) in the ﬁrst
two volumes of Imago, a periodical issued under my direction.
They represent a ﬁrst attempt on my part at applying the point of
view and the ﬁndings of psycho-analysis to some unsolved prob-
lems of social psychology [ Völkerpsychologie ]. Thus they o ﬀer a
methodological contrast on the one hand to Wilhelm Wundt’sextensive work, which applies the hypotheses and workingmethods of non-analytic psychology to the same purposes, and
on the other hand to the writings of the Zurich school ofpsycho-analysis, which endeavour, on the contrary, to solve theproblems of individual psychology with the help of materialderived from social psychology. (Cf. Jung, 1912 and 1913.) Ireadily confess that it was from these two sources that I receivedthe ﬁrst stimulus for my own essays.
I am fully conscious of the de ﬁciencies of these studies. I need
not mention those which are necessarily characteristic of pion-eering work; but others require a word of explanation. The fouressays collected in these pages aim at arousing the interest of a
fairly wide circle of educated readers, but they cannot in fact beunderstood and appreciated except by those few who are nolonger strangers to the essential nature of psycho-analysis. Theyseek to bridge the gap between students of such subjects associal anthropology, philology and folklore on the one hand,and psycho-analysts on the other. Yet they cannot o ﬀer to either
side what each lacks—to the former an adequate initiation intothe new psychological technique or to the latter a su ﬃcient
grasp of the material that awaits treatment. They must thereforerest content with attracting the attention of the two parties andwith encouraging a belief that occasional co-operation betweenthem could not fail to be of bene ﬁt to research.
It will be found that the two principal themes from which the
title of this little book is derived—totems and taboos—have notreceived the same treatment. The analysis of taboos is put for-ward as an assured and exhaustive attempt at the solution of theproblem. The investigation of totemism does no more thandeclare that ‘here is what psycho-analysis can at the momentcontribute towards elucidating the problem of the totem’. Thediﬀerence is related to the fact that taboos still exist among us.
Though expressed in a negative form and directed towardsanother subject-matter, they do not di ﬀer in their psychological
nature from Kant’s ‘categorical imperative’, which operates in acompulsive fashion and rejects any conscious motives. Totem-ism, on the contrary, is something alien to our contemporaryfeelings—a religio-social institution which has been long aban-doned as an actuality and replaced by newer forms. It has leftonly the slightest traces behind it in the religions, manners andcustoms of the civilized peoples of to-day and has been subjectto far-reaching modi ﬁcations even among the races over which
it still holds sway. The social and technical advances in humanhistory have a ﬀected taboos far less than the totem.
An attempt is made in this volume to deduce the originalpreface xmeaning of totemism from the vestiges remaining of it in
childhood—from the hints of it which emerge in the course ofthe growth of our own children. The close connection betweentotems and taboos carries us a step further along the pathtowards the hypothesis presented in these pages; and if in theend that hypothesis bears a highly improbable appearance, thatneed be no argument against the possibility of its approximatingmore or less closely to the reality which it is so hard toreconstruct.
R, September  1913.preface xiPREFACE TO THE HEBREW TRANSLATION1
No reader of [the Hebrew version of] this book will ﬁnd it easy
to put himself in the emotional position of an author who isignorant of the language of holy writ, who is completelyestranged from the religion of his fathers—as well as from everyother religion—and who cannot take a share in nationalistideals, but who has yet never repudiated his people, who feelsthat he is in his essential nature a Jew and who has no desire toalter that nature. If the question were put to him: ‘Since you haveabandoned all these common characteristics of your country-men, what is there left to you that is Jewish?’ he would reply: ‘Avery great deal, and probably its very essence.’ He could not nowexpress that essence clearly in words; but some day, no doubt, itwill become accessible to the scienti ﬁc mind.
Thus it is an experience of a quite special kind for such
an author when a book of his is translated into the Hebrew
1[This preface was ﬁrst published in German in Ges. Werke , 12, 385 (1934). It
was then stated that a Hebrew translation was about to be published in Jerusa-lem by Stybel. Actually it was not published there until 1939, by Kirjcith Zefer.]language and put into the hands of readers for whom that his-
toric idiom is a living tongue: a book, moreover, which dealswith the origin of religion and morality, though it adopts noJewish standpoint and makes no exceptions in favour of Jewry.The author hopes, however, that he will be at one with hisreaders in the conviction that unprejudiced science cannotremain a stranger to the spirit of the new Jewry.
V, December  1930.preface to the hebrew translation xiv1
THE HORROR OF INCEST
Prehistoric man, in the various stages of his development, is
known to us through the inanimate monuments and imple-ments which he has left behind, through the information abouthis art, his religion and his attitude towards life which has cometo us either directly or by way of tradition handed down inlegends, myths and fairy tales, and through the relics of hismode of thought which survive in our own manners and cus-toms. But apart from this, in a certain sense he is still our con-temporary. There are men still living who, as we believe, standvery near to primitive man, far nearer than we do, and whom wetherefore regard as his direct heirs and representatives. Such isour view of those whom we describe as savages or half-savages;and their mental life must have a peculiar interest for us if we areright in seeing in it a well-preserved picture of an early stage ofour own development.
If that supposition is correct, a comparison between the
psychology of primitive peoples, as it is taught by social anthro-pology, and the psychology of neurotics, as it has been revealedby psycho-analysis, will be bound to show numerous points of
agreement and will throw new light upon familiar facts in bothsciences.
For external as well as for internal reasons, I shall select as the
basis of this comparison the tribes which have been described byanthropologists as the most backward and miserable of savages,the aborigines of Australia, the youngest continent, in whosefauna, too, we can still observe much that is archaic and that hasperished elsewhere.
The Australian aborigines are regarded as a distinct race,
showing neither physical nor linguistic relationship with theirnearest neighbours, the Melanesian, Polynesian and Malayanpeoples. They do not build houses or permanent shelters; theydo not cultivate the soil; they keep no domesticated animalsexcept the dog; they are not even acquainted with the art ofmaking pottery. They live entirely upon the ﬂesh of all kinds of
animals which they hunt, and upon roots which they dig. Kingsor chiefs are unknown among them; communal a ﬀairs are
decided by a council of elders. It is highly doubtful whether anyreligion, in the shape of a worship of higher beings, can beattributed to them. The tribes in the interior of the continent,who have to struggle against the hardest conditions of existenceas a result of the scarcity of water, appear to be more primitive inall respects than those living near the coast.
We should certainly not expect that the sexual life of these
poor, naked cannibals would be moral in our sense or that theirsexual instincts would be subjected to any great degree of restric-tion. Yet we ﬁnd that they set before themselves with the most
scrupulous care and the most painful severity the aim of avoid-ing incestuous sexual relations. Indeed, their whole social organ-ization seems to serve that purpose or to have been brought intorelation with its attainment.
Among the Australians the place of all the religious and socialtotem and taboo 2institutions which they lack is taken by the system ‘totemism’.
Australian tribes fall into smaller divisions, or clans, each ofwhich is named after its totem. What is a totem? It is as a rule ananimal (whether edible and harmless or dangerous and feared)and more rarely a plant or a natural phenomenon (such as rainor water), which stands in a peculiar relation to the whole clan.In the ﬁrst place, the totem is the common ancestor of the clan;
at the same time it is their guardian spirit and helper, whichsends them oracles and, if dangerous to others, recognizes andspares its own children. Conversely, the clansmen are under asacred obligation (subject to automatic sanctions) not to kill ordestroy their totem and to avoid eating its ﬂesh (or deriving
beneﬁt from it in other ways). The totemic character is inherent,
not in some individual animal or entity, but in all the individualsof a given class. From time to time festivals are celebrated atwhich the clansmen represent or imitate the motions andattributes of their totem in ceremonial dances.
The totem may be inherited either through the female or
through the male line. It is possible that originally the formermethod of descent prevailed everywhere and was only sub-sequently replaced by the latter. An Australian’s relation to histotem is the basis of all his social obligations: it overrides on theone hand his tribal membership and on the other hand his bloodrelationships.
1
The totem is not attached to one particular place. The clans-
men are distributed in di ﬀerent localities and live peacefully side
by side with members of other totem clans.2
1‘The Totem bond is stronger than the bond of blood or family in the modern
sense.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, 53.)
2This highly condensed summary of the totemic system must necessarily be
subject to further comments and quali ﬁcations. The word ‘totem’ was ﬁrst
introduced in 1791 (in the form ‘totam’) from the North American Indians byan Englishman, J. Long. The subject itself has gradually attracted great scienti ﬁc
interest and has produced a copious literature, from which I may select asthe horror of incest
3And now we come at last to the characteristic of the totemic
system which has attracted the interest of psycho-analysts. Inalmost every place where we ﬁnd totems we also ﬁnd a law
against persons of the same totem having sexual relations with
works of capital importance J. G. Frazer’s four-volume T otemism and Exogamy
(1910) and the writings of Andrew Lang, e.g. The Secret of the T otem (1905). The
merit of having been the ﬁrst to recognize the importance of totemism for
human prehistory lies with a Scotsman, John Ferguson McLennan (1869–70).Totemic institutions were, or still are, to be observed in operation, not onlyamong the Australians, but also among the North American Indians, amongthe peoples of Oceania, in the East Indies and in a large part of Africa. It mayalso be inferred from certain vestigial remains, for which it is otherwise hard toaccount, that totemism existed at one time among the Aryan and Semiticaboriginal races of Europe and Asia. Many investigators are therefore inclinedto regard it as a necessary phase of human development which has been passedthrough universally.
How did prehistoric men come to adopt totems? How, that is, did they come
to make the fact of their being descended from one animal or another the basisof their social obligations and, as we shall see presently, of their sexual restric-tions? There are numerous theories on the subject—of which Wundt (1906[264 ﬀ.]) has given an epitome for German readers—but no agreement. It is
my intention to devote a special study before long to the problem of totemism,in which I shall attempt to solve it by the help of a psycho-analytic line ofapproach. (See the fourth essay in this volume.)
Not only, however, is the theory of totemism a matter of dispute; the facts
themselves are scarcely capable of being expressed in general terms as I havetried to do in the text above. There is scarcely a statement which does not callfor exceptions or contradictions. But it must not be forgotten that even themost primitive and conservative races are in some sense ancient  races and have a
long past history behind them during which their original conditions of lifehave been subject to much development and distortion. So it comes about thatin those races in which totemism exists to-day, we may ﬁnd it in various stages
of decay and disintegration or in the process of transition to other social andreligious institutions, or again in a stationary condition which may di ﬀer
greatly from the original one. The di ﬃculty in this last case is to decide
whether we should regard the present state of things as a true picture of thesigniﬁcant features of the past or as a secondary distortion of them.totem and taboo
4one another and consequently against their marrying.1 This,
then, is ‘exogamy’, an institution related to totemism.
Strictly enforced as it is, this prohibition is a remarkable one.
There is nothing in the concept or attributes of the totem whichI have so far mentioned to lead us to anticipate it; so that it ishard to understand how it has become involved in the totemicsystem. We cannot, therefore, feel surprised that some investiga-tors actually suppose that exogamy had originally—in the earliesttimes and in its true meaning—nothing to do with totemism,but became attached to it (without there being any underlyingconnection) at some time when marriage restrictions becamenecessary. However this may be, the bond between totemismand exogamy exists and is clearly a very ﬁrm one.
Some further considerations will make the signi ﬁcance of this
prohibition clearer:
(a) The violation of the prohibition is not left to what might
be called the ‘automatic’ punishment of the guilty parties, as inthe case of other totem prohibitions, such as that against killingthe totem animal. It is avenged in the most energetic fashion bythe whole clan, as though it were a question of averting somedanger that threatened the whole community or some guilt thatwas pressing upon it. A few sentences from Frazer (1910, 1, 54)will show how severely such misdeeds are treated by savageswho are otherwise far from being moral by our standards:
‘In Australia the regular penalty for sexual intercourse with a
person of a forbidden clan is death. It matters not whether thewoman be of the same local group or has been captured in warfrom another tribe; a man of the wrong clan who uses her as hiswife is hunted down and killed by his clansmen, and so is thewoman; though in some cases, if they succeed in eluding capturefor a certain time, the o ﬀence may be condoned. In the Ta-ta-thi
tribe, New South Wales, in the rare cases which occur, the man is
1[This sentence is in spaced type in the original.]the horror of incest 5killed but the woman is only beaten or speared, or both, till she
is nearly dead; the reason given for not actually killing herbeing that she was probably coerced. Even in casual amours theclan prohibitions are strictly observed; any violations of theseprohibitions “are regarded with the utmost abhorrence and arepunished by death”.’ [Quoted from Cameron (1885, 351.)]
(b) Since the same severe punishment is in ﬂicted in the case of
passing love-a ﬀairs which have not resulted in any children, it
seems unlikely that the reasons for the prohibition are of apractical nature.
(c) Since totems are hereditary and not changed by marriage,
it is easy to follow the consequences of the prohibition. Where,for instance, descent is through the female line, if a man of theKangaroo totem marries a woman of the Emu totem, all thechildren, both boys and girls, belong to the Emu clan. The totemregulation will therefore make it impossible for a son of thismarriage to have incestuous intercourse with his mother orsisters, who are Emus like himself.
1
(d) But a little more re ﬂection will show that exogamy linked
with the totem e ﬀects more (and therefore aims at more) than
the prevention of incest with a man’s mother and sisters. Itmakes sexual intercourse impossible for a man with all thewomen of his own clan (that is to say with a number of womenwho are not his blood-relatives) by treating them all as thoughthey were his blood-relatives. It is di ﬃcult at ﬁrst sight to see the
1On the other hand, at all events so far as this prohibition is concerned, the
father, who is a Kangaroo, is free to commit incest with his daughters, who areEmus. If the totem descended through the male line, however, the Kangaroo
father would be prohibited from incest with his daughters (since all his chil-dren would be Kangaroos), whereas the son would be free to commit incestwith his mother. These implications of totem prohibitions suggest that descentthrough the female line is older than that through the male, since there aregrounds for thinking that totem prohibitions were principally directed againstthe incestuous desires of the son.totem and taboo
6psychological justi ﬁcation for this very extensive restriction,
which goes far beyond anything comparable among civilizedpeoples. It may be gathered from this, however, that the partplayed by the totem as common ancestor is taken very seriously.All those who are descended from the same totem are blood-relations. They form a single family, and within that family eventhe most distant degree of kinship is regarded as an absolutehindrance to sexual intercourse.
We see, then, that these savages have an unusually great horror
of incest, or are sensitive on the subject to an unusual degree,and that they combine this with a peculiarity which remainsobscure to us—of replacing real blood-relationship by totemkinship. This latter contrast must not, however, be too muchexaggerated, and we must remember that the totem prohibitionsinclude that against real incest as a special case.
The riddle of how it came about that the real family was replaced
by the totem clan must perhaps remain unsolved till the nature ofthe totem itself can be explained. At the same time, it is to beobserved that if there were a certain degree of freedom of sexualintercourse outside marriage, blood-relationship, and con-sequently the prevention of incest, would become so uncertainthat the prohibition would stand in need of a wider basis. It istherefore worth remarking that Australian customs permit theoccurrence, in certain social situations and during certain festivals,of breaches in a man’s exclusive conjugal rights over a woman.
Linguistic usage in these Australian tribes
1 exhibits a peculi-
arity which is no doubt relevant here. For the terms used bythem to express the various degrees of kinship do not denote arelation between two individuals but between an individual anda group. This is what L. H. Morgan [1877] named the ‘classi ﬁca-
tory’ system of relationship. Thus a man uses the term ‘father’not only for his actual procreator but also for all the other men
1As well as in most other totemic communities.the horror of incest 7whom his mother might have married according to tribal law
and who therefore might have procreated him; he uses the term‘mother’ not only for the woman who actually bore him but also
for all the other women who might have borne him withouttransgressing the tribal law; he uses the terms ‘brother’ and‘sister’ not only for the children of his actual parents but also forthe children of all those persons who stand in the relation ofparents to him in the classi ﬁcatory sense; and so on. Thus the
kinship terms which two Australians apply to each other do notnecessarily indicate any consanguinity, as ours would do: theyrepresent social rather than physical relationships. Somethingapproaching the classi ﬁcatory system is to be found among us
when, for instance, children are encouraged to refer to all theirparents’ friends as ‘Uncle’ or ‘Aunt’, or when we speak in ametaphorical sense of ‘brothers in Apollo’ or ‘sisters in Christ’.
Though this use of words strikes us as so puzzling, it is easily
explained if we look on it as a survival of the marriage institu-tion which the Rev. L. Fison has called ‘group marriage’ andwhich consists in a certain number of men exercising conjugalrights over a certain number of women. The children of such agroup marriage would then justly regard one another as brothersand sisters (though they were not all born of the same mother)and would regard all the men in the group as their fathers.
Though some authors, such as Westermarck (1901), have
disputed the conclusions which others have drawn from theexistence of the classi ﬁcatory system of relationship, those who
have the closest acquaintance with the Australian natives areagreed in regarding that system as a survival from the days ofgroup marriage. Indeed, according to Spencer and Gillen (1899[64]), a certain form of group marriage exists to this day in theUrabunna and Dieri tribes. Group marriage thus preceded indi-vidual marriage among these peoples, and after its disappearanceleft de ﬁnite traces behind both in language and customs.
But when once we have put group marriage in the place oftotem and taboo 8individual marriage, the apparently excessive degree of avoid-
ance of incest which we have come across among the samepeoples becomes intelligible. Totemic exogamy, the prohibitionof sexual intercourse between members of the same clan,appears to have been the appropriate means for preventinggroup incest; it thus became established and persisted long afterits raison d’être  had ceased.
It may seem that we have thus discovered the motives that led
the Australian natives to set up their marriage restrictions; butwe have now to learn that the actual state of a ﬀairs reveals a far
greater, and at ﬁrst sight a bewildering, complexity. For there are
few races in Australia in which the totem barrier is the soleprohibition. Most of them are organized in such a way as to fallinto two divisions, known as marriage-classes or ‘phratries’.Each of these phratries is exogamous and comprises a number oftotem clans. As a rule each phratry is further subdivided into two‘sub-phratries’, the whole tribe being thus divided into four,with the sub-phratries intermediate between the phratries andthe totem clans.
The following diagram represents the typical organization of
an Australian tribe and corresponds to the actual situation in avery large number of cases:
Here the twelve totem clans are divided into four sub-
phratries and two phratries. All the divisions are exogamous.
1
1The number of totems is chosen arbitrarily.the horror of incest 9Subphratries c and e form an exogamous unit; and so also do
subphratries d and f. The result (and therefore the purpose) ofthese arrangements cannot be doubted: they bring about a stillfurther restriction on the choice of marriage and on sexual lib-erty. Let us suppose that each clan contains an equal number ofmembers. Then, if only the twelve totem clans existed, eachmember of a clan would have his choice among 
11––12 of all the
women in the tribe. The existence of the two phratries reduceshis choice to 
6––12 or 1–2, for then a man of totem a can only marry a
woman of totems 1 to 6. With the introduction of the foursubphratries his choice is still further reduced to 
3––12 or 1–4, for in
that case a man of totem a is restricted in his choice of a wife to awoman of totems 4, 5 or 6.
The historical relation between the marriage-classes (of
which in some tribes there are as many as eight) and the totemclans is completely obscure. It is merely evident that thesearrangements are directed towards the same aim as totemicexogamy and pursue it still further. While, however, totemicexogamy gives one the impression of being a sacred ordinanceof unknown origin—in short, of being a custom—the compli-cated institution of the marriage-classes, with their subdivisionsand the regulations attaching to them, look more like the resultof deliberate legislation, which may perhaps have taken up thetask of preventing incest afresh because the in ﬂuence of the
totem was waning. And, while the totemic system is, as weknow, the basis of all the other social obligations and moralrestrictions of the tribe, the signi ﬁcance of the phratries seems in
general not to extend beyond the regulation of marriage choicewhich is its aim.
The system of marriage-classes in its furthest developments
bears witness to an endeavour to go beyond the prevention ofnatural and group incest and to forbid marriage between stillmore distant groups of relatives. In this it resembles the CatholicChurch, which extended the ancient prohibition against mar-totem and taboo 10riage between brothers and sisters to marriage between cousins
and even to marriage between those who were merely spiritualrelatives [—godfathers, godmothers and godchildren]. (Cf.Lang, 1910–11 [87].)
It would be little to our purpose if we were to follow in detail
the extraordinarily involved and obscure discussions on the ori-gin and signi ﬁcance of the marriage-classes and on their relation
to the totem. For our purpose it is enough to draw attention tothe great care which is devoted by the Australians, as well as byother savage peoples, to the prevention of incest.
1 It must be
admitted that these savages are even more sensitive on the sub-ject of incest than we are. They are probably liable to a greatertemptation to it and for that reason stand in need of fullerprotection.
But the horror of incest shown by these peoples is not satis ﬁed
by the erection of the institutions which I have described andwhich seem to be directed principally against group incest. Wemust add to them a number of ‘customs’ which regulate thedealings of individuals with their near relatives in our sense ofthe term, customs which are enforced literally with religiousstrictness and the purpose of which can scarcely be doubted.These customs or customary prohibitions have been termed‘avoidances’. They extend far beyond the totemic races ofAustralia; but once again I must ask my readers to be contentwith a fragmentary extract from the copious material.
In Melanesia restrictive prohibitions of this sort govern a
boy’s intercourse with his mother and sisters. Thus, for instance,in Lepers’ Island, one of the New Hebrides, when a boy hasreached a certain age he no longer lives at home, but takes up hisquarters in the ‘club-house’, where he now regularly eats andsleeps. It is true that he may still go to his father’s house to ask
1Storfer (1911 [16]) has quite recently insisted on this point.the horror of incest 11for food, but if his sister is at home he must go away before
eating; if no sister is there he may sit down near the door and eat.If by chance a brother and sister meet in the open, she must runaway or hide. If a boy knows that certain footprints in the roadare his sister’s, he will not follow them, nor will she follow his.Indeed, he will not even utter her name, and will avoid the use ofa common word if it forms part of her name. This avoidancebegins with the puberty ceremonies and is maintained through-out life. The reserve between a son and his mother increases asthe boy grows up and is much more on her side than on his. Ifhis mother brings him food, she does not give it him but puts itdown for him to take. In speaking to him she does not tutoyer
him, but uses the more distant plural forms.
1
Similar customs prevail in New Caledonia. If a brother and
sister happen to meet on a path, the sister will throw herself intothe bushes and he will pass on without turning his head.
2
Among the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain a
sister, after her marriage, is not allowed to converse with herbrother; she never utters his name, but designates him byanother word.
3
In New Mecklenburg cousins of one kind are subject to simi-
lar restrictions, as are brothers and sisters. They may not comenear each other, may not shake hands and may not give eachother presents; but they are allowed to speak to each other at adistance of some paces. The penalty for incest with a sister isdeath by hanging.
4
In Fiji these avoidance rules are particularly strict; they a ﬀect
not only blood sisters but tribal sisters as well. It must strike us asall the more puzzling to hear that these same savages practise
1Frazer (1910, 2, 77 f.), quoting Codrington (1891, [232]).
2[Frazer (1910, 2, 78), quoting Lambert (1900, 114).]
3Frazer (1910, 2, 124) [quoting Parkinson (1907, 67 f.)].
4Frazer (1910, 2, 130 f.), quoting Peckel (1908 [467]).totem and taboo 12sacred orgies, in which precisely these forbidden degrees of
kinship seek sexual intercourse—puzzling, that is, unless weprefer to regard the contrast as an explanation of theprohibition.
1
Among the Battas of Sumatra the rules of avoidance apply to
all near relations. ‘A Batta, for example, would think it shockingwere a brother to escort his sister to an evening party. Even in thepresence of others a Batta brother and sister feel embarrassed. Ifone of them comes into the house, the other will go away.Further, a father may never be alone in the house with his daugh-ter, nor a mother with her son ....  The Dutch missionary who
reports these customs adds that he is sorry to say that from whathe knows of the Battas he believes the maintenance of most ofthese rules to be very necessary.’ These people assume as amatter of course that a solitary meeting between a man and awoman will lead to an improper intimacy between them. Andsince they believe that intercourse between near relations willlead to punishments and calamities of all sorts, they are right toavoid any temptation to trangress these prohibitions.
2
Curiously enough, among the Barongo of Delagoa Bay, in
South Africa, the strictest rules a ﬀect a man’s relations with his
sister-in-law, the wife of his wife’s brother. If he meets thisformidable person anywhere, he carefully avoids her. He doesnot eat out of the same dish with her, he speaks to her withembarrassment, does not venture into her hut and greets her in atrembling voice.
3
A rule of avoidance with which one would have expected to
meet more frequently operates among the A-kamba (orWakamba) of British East Africa. A girl has to avoid her fatherbetween the age of puberty and the time of her marriage. If they
1Frazer (1910, 2, 146 ﬀ.), quoting Fison [1885, 27 ﬀ.].
2Frazer (1910, 2, 189) [quoting Joustra (1902, 391 f.)].
3Frazer (1910, 2, 388), quoting [Junod 1898, 73 ﬀ.].the horror of incest 13meet in the road, she hides while he passes, and she may never
go and sit near him. This holds good until the moment of herbetrothal. After her marriage she does not avoid her father in anyway.
1
By far the most widespread and strictest avoidance (and the
most interesting from the point of view of civilized races) is thatwhich restricts a man’s intercourse with his mother-in-law. It isquite general in Australia and also extends over Melanesia, Poly-nesia and the Negro races of Africa, wherever traces of totemismand the classi ﬁcatory system of relationship are found and prob-
ably still further. In some of these places there are similar pro-hibitions against a woman having innocent intercourse withher father-in-law; but they are far less usual and severe. In a fewisolated cases both parents-in-law are subject to avoidance. Sincewe are less concerned in the ethnographical extent of this avoid-ance than in its substance and purpose, I shall once again restrictmyself to quoting a few examples.
Among the Melanesians of the Banks’ Islands ‘these rules of
avoidance are very strict and minute. A man will not come nearhis wife’s mother and she will not come near him. If the twochance to meet in a path, the woman will step out of it andstand with her back turned till he has gone by, or perhaps, if itbe more convenient, he will move out of the way. At Vanua Lava,in Port Patteson, a man would not even follow his mother-in-law along the beach until the rising tide had washed her foot-prints from the sand. Yet a man and his mother-in-law may talkto each other at a distance; but a woman will on no accountmention the name of her daughter’s husband, nor will he namehers.’
2
In the Solomon Islands, after his marriage a man may neither
see nor converse with his mother-in-law. If he meets her, he may
1Frazer (1910, 2, 424) [quoting C. W . Hobley (unpublished MS.)].
2Frazer (1910, 2, 76) [quoting Codrington (1891, 42 ﬀ.)].totem and taboo 14not recognize her, but must make o ﬀ and hide himself as fast as
he can.1
Among the Eastern Bantu ‘custom requires that a man should
“be ashamed of” his wife’s mother, that is to say, he must studi-ously shun her society. He may not enter the same hut with her,and if by chance they meet on a path, one or other turns aside,she perhaps hiding behind a bush, while he screens his face witha shield. If they cannot thus avoid each other, and the mother-in-law has nothing else to cover herself with, she will tie a wisp ofgrass round her head as a token of ceremonial avoidance. Allcorrespondence between the two has to be carried on eitherthrough a third party or by shouting to each other at a distancewith some barrier, such as the kraal fence, interposed betweenthem. They may not even pronounce each other’s proper name.’(Frazer, 1910, 2, 385.)
Among the Basoga, a Bantu people who live in the region of
the sources of the Nile, a man may only speak to his mother-in-law when she is in another room and out of sight. Incidentally,these people have such a horror of incest that they punish it evenwhen it occurs among their domestic animals. (Frazer, 1910, 2,
461.)
While there can be no doubt as to the purpose and signi ﬁ-
cance of the other avoidances between near relations, and theyare universally regarded as protective measures against incest,the prohibitions a ﬀecting a man’s intercourse with his mother-
in-law have received another interpretation in some quarters. Itwas with justice regarded as incomprehensible that all these dif-ferent peoples should feel such great fear of the temptationpresented to a man by an elderly woman, who might have been,but in fact was not, his mother. (Crawley, 1902, 405.)
This objection was also raised against the view put forward
by Fison [Fison and Howitt, 1880, 104]. He pointed out that
1Frazer (1910, 2,117), quoting Ribbe (1903 [140 f.]).the horror of incest 15certain systems of marriage-classes had gaps in them, as a result
of which marriage between a man and his mother-in-law wasnot theoretically impossible. For that reason, he suggested, aspecial guarantee against that possibility became necessary.
Sir John Lubbock (1870 [84 f.]) traced back the attitude of a
mother-in-law to her son-in-law to the institution of ‘marriageby capture’. ‘When the capture was a reality’, he writes, ‘the
indignation of the parents would also be real; when it became amere symbol, the parental anger would be symbolized also, andwould be continued even after its origin was forgotten.’ Crawley[1902, 406] has no di ﬃculty in showing how insu ﬃciently this
attempted explanation covers the details of the observed facts.
Tylor [1889, 246 f.] believes that the treatment given to a son-
in-law by his mother-in-law is merely a form of ‘cutting’ ornon-recognition by the wife’s family: the man is regarded as an‘outsider’ until the ﬁrst child is born. In the ﬁrst place, however,
the prohibition is not always brought to an end when thisoccurs. But, apart from this, it may be objected that this explan-ation throws no light on the fact that the prohibition centresparticularly on the mother -in-law—that is to say, that it over-
looks the factor of sex. Moreover it takes no account of theattitude of religious horror expressed in the prohibition.(Crawley, 1902, 407.)
A Zulu woman, questioned as to the basis of the prohibition,
gave the sensitive reply: ‘It is not right that he should see thebreasts which suckled his wife.’
1
As we know, the relation between son-in-law and mother-in-
law is also one of the delicate points of family organization incivilized  communities. That relation is no longer subject to rules of
avoidance in the social system of the white peoples of Europeand America; but many disputes and much unpleasantness couldoften be eliminated if the avoidance still existed as a custom and
1Crawley (1902, 401), quoting Leslie (1875 [141]).totem and taboo 16did not have to be re-erected by individuals. It may be regarded
by some Europeans as an act of high wisdom on the part of thesesavage races that by their rules of avoidance they entirely pre-cluded any contact between two persons brought into this closerelationship to each other. There is scarcely room for doubt thatsomething in the psychological relation of a mother-in-law to ason-in-law breeds hostility between them and makes it hard forthem to live together. But the fact that in civilized societiesmothers-in-law are such a favourite subject for jokes seems tome to suggest that the emotional relation involved includessharply contrasted components. I believe, that is, that this rela-tion is in fact an ‘ambivalent’ one, composed of con ﬂicting
aﬀectionate and hostile impulses.
Some of those impulses are obvious enough. On the side of
the mother-in-law there is reluctance to give up the possessionof her daughter, distrust of the stranger to whom she is to behanded over, an impulse to retain the dominating positionwhich she has occupied in her own house. On the man’s sidethere is a determination not to submit any longer to someoneelse’s will, jealousy of anyone who possessed his wife’s a ﬀection
before he did, and, last but not least, an unwillingness to allowanything to interfere with the illusory over-valuation bred of hissexual feelings. The ﬁgure of his mother-in-law usually causes
such an interference, for she has many features which remindhim of her daughter and yet lacks all the charms of youth,beauty and spiritual freshness which endear his wife to him.
But we are able to bring forward other motives than these,
thanks to the knowledge of concealed mental impulses whichwe have acquired from the psycho-analytic examination of indi-vidual human beings. A woman whose psycho-sexual needsshould ﬁnd satisfaction in her marriage and her family life is
often threatened with the danger of being left unsatis ﬁed,
because her marriage relation has come to a premature end andbecause of the uneventfulness of her emotional life. A mother, asthe horror of incest 17she grows older, saves herself from this by putting herself in her
children’s place, by identifying herself with them; and this shedoes by making their emotional experiences her own. Parentsare said to stay young with their children, and that is indeed oneof the most precious psychological gains that parents derivefrom their children. Where a marriage is childless, the wife haslost one of the things which might be of most help to her intolerating the resignation that her own marriage demands fromher. A mother’s sympathetic identi ﬁcation with her daughter can
easily go so far that she herself falls in love with the man herdaughter loves; and in glaring instances this may lead to severeforms of neurotic illness as a result of her violent mentalstruggles against this emotional situation. In any case, it veryfrequently happens that a mother-in-law is subject to an impulse
to fall in love in this way, and this impulse itself or an opposingtrend are added to the tumult of con ﬂicting forces in her mind.
And very often the unkind, sadistic components of her love aredirected on to her son-in-law in order that the forbidden,aﬀectionate ones may be the more severely suppressed.
A man’s relation to his mother-in-law is complicated by simi-
lar impulses, though they have another source. It is regularlyfound that he chose his mother as the object of his love, andperhaps his sister as well, before passing on to his ﬁnal choice.
Because of the barrier that exists against incest, his love isdeﬂected from the two ﬁgures on whom his a ﬀection was
centred in his childhood on to an outside object that is modelledupon them. The place of his own and his sister’s mother is takenby his mother-in-law. He has an impulse to fall back upon hisoriginal choice, though everything in him ﬁghts against it. His
horror of incest insists that the genealogical history of his choiceof an object for his love shall not be recalled. His repudiation ofthis impulse is also facilitated by the fact that his mother-in-lawis only a contemporary ﬁgure; he has not known her all his life,
so that there is no unchangeable picture of her preserved in histotem and taboo 18unconscious. A streak of irritability and malevolence that is apt
to be present in the medley of his feelings leads us to suspect thatshe does in fact o ﬀer him a temptation to incest; and this is
conﬁrmed by the not uncommon event of a man openly falling
in love with the woman who is later to be his mother-in-lawbefore transferring his love to her daughter.
I can see nothing against the presumption that it is precisely
this incestuous factor in the relation that provides savages withthe motive for their rules of avoidance between son-in-law andmother-in-law. Thus the explanation which we should adopt forthese strictly enforced avoidances among primitive peoples isthat put forward by Fison [see p. 13], which regards themmerely as a further protection against possible incest. The sameexplanation holds good of all other avoidances, between bothblood and tribal relations. The only di ﬀerence would be that in
the case of blood relations the possibility of incest is an immedi-ate one and the intention to prevent it may be conscious; in theother cases, including that of a man’s relation to his mother-in-law, the possibility of incest would seem to be a temptation inphantasy set in motion through the agency of unconsciousconnecting links.
There has been little opportunity in the preceding pages for
showing how new light can be thrown upon the facts of socialpsychology by the adoption of a psycho-analytic method ofapproach: for the horror of incest displayed by savages has longbeen recognized as such and stands in need of no further inter-pretation. All that I have been able to add to our understandingof it is to emphasize the fact that it is essentially an infantile  feature
and that it reveals a striking agreement with the mental life ofneurotic patients. Psycho-analysis has taught us that a boy’searliest choice of objects for his love is incestuous and that thoseobjects are forbidden ones—his mother and his sister. We havelearnt, too, the manner in which, as he grows up, he liberatesthe horror of incest 19himself from this incestuous attraction. A neurotic, on the other
hand, invariably exhibits some degree of psychical infantilism.He has either failed to get free from the psycho-sexual condi-tions that prevailed in his childhood or he has returned tothem—two possibilities which may be summed up as develop-mental inhibition and regression. Thus incestuous ﬁxations of
libido continue to play (or begin once more to play) the princi-pal part in his unconscious mental life. We have arrived at thepoint of regarding a child’s relation to his parents, dominated asit is by incestuous longings, as the nuclear complex of neurosis.This revelation of the importance of incest in neurosis is natur-ally received with universal scepticism by adults and normalpeople. Similar expressions of disbelief, for instance, inevitablygreet the writings of Otto Rank [e.g. 1907 and 1912], whichhave brought more and more evidence to show the extent towhich the interest of creative writers centres round the theme ofincest and how the same theme, in countless variations and dis-tortions, provides the subject-matter of poetry. We are driven tobelieve that this rejection is principally a product of the distastewhich human beings feel for their early incestuous wishes, nowovertaken by repression. It is therefore of no small importancethat we are able to show that these same incestuous wishes,which are later destined to become unconscious, are stillregarded by savage peoples as immediate perils against whichthe most severe measures of defence must be enforced.totem and taboo 202
TABOO AND EMOTIONAL
AMBIVALENCE
(1)
‘Taboo’ is a Polynesian word. It is di ﬃcult for us to ﬁnd a transla-
tion for it, since the concept connoted by it is one which we nolonger possess. It was still current among the ancient Romans,whose ‘ sacer’ was the same as the Polynesian ‘taboo’. So, too, the
‘
α῎ γο/sigmaalt’ of the Greeks and the ‘ kadesh ’ of the Hebrews must have
had the same meaning as is expressed in ‘taboo’ by the Polyne-sians and in analogous terms by many other races in America,Africa (Madagascar) and North and Central Asia.
The meaning of ‘taboo’, as we see it, diverges in two con-
trary directions. To us it means, on the one hand, ‘sacred’,‘consecrated’, and on the other ‘uncanny’, ‘dangerous’, ‘for-bidden’, ‘unclean’. The converse of ‘taboo’ in Polynesian is‘noa’, which means ‘common’ or ‘generally accessible’. Thus
‘taboo’ has about it a sense of something unapproachable, andit is principally expressed in prohibitions and restrictions. Ourcollocation ‘holy dread’ would often coincide in meaning with
‘taboo’.
Taboo restrictions are distinct from religious or moral pro-
hibitions. They are not based upon any divine ordinance, butmay be said to impose themselves on their own account. Theydiﬀer from moral prohibitions in that they fall into no system
that declares quite generally that certain abstinences must beobserved and gives reasons for that necessity. Taboo prohibitionshave no grounds and are of unknown origin. Though they areunintelligible to us, to those who are dominated by them theyare taken as a matter of course.
Wundt (1906, 308) describes taboo as the oldest human
unwritten code of laws. It is generally supposed that taboo isolder than gods and dates back to a period before any kind ofreligion existed.
Since we need an impartial account of taboo to submit to
psycho-analytic examination, I shall now give some extracts andsummaries of portions of the article ‘Taboo’ in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica  (1910–11),
1 the author of which was Northcote W .
Thomas, the anthropologist.
‘Properly speaking taboo includes only ( a) the sacred (or
unclean) character of person or things, ( b) the kind of prohib-
ition which results from this character, and ( c) the sanctity (or
uncleanness) which results from a violation of the prohibition.The converse of taboo in Polynesia is noa and allied forms, which
mean “general” or “common” ....
‘Various classes of taboo in the wider sense may be dis-
tinguished: (i) natural or direct, the result of mana (mysterious
power) inherent in a person or thing; (ii) communicated orindirect, equally the result of mana, but ( a) acquired or ( b)
imposed by a priest, chief or other person; (iii) intermediate,
1This includes a bibliography of the chief literature on the subject.totem and taboo 22where both factors are present, as in the appropriation of a
wife to her husband .... ’  The term is also applied to other
ritual restrictions, but what is better described as a ‘religiousinterdiction’ should not be referred to as taboo.
‘The objects of taboo are many: (i) direct taboos aim at ( a)
the protection of important persons—chiefs, priests, etc.—andthings against harm; ( b) the safeguarding of the weak—
women, children and common people generally—from thepowerful mana (magical in ﬂuence) of chiefs and priests; ( c) the
provision against the dangers incurred by handling or comingin contact with corpses, by eating certain foods, etc.; ( d) the
guarding the chief acts of life—birth, initiation, marriage andsexual functions, etc., against interference; ( e) the securing of
human beings against the wrath or power of gods and spirits;
1
(f) the securing of unborn infants and young children, who
stand in a specially sympathetic relation with one or both par-ents, from the consequences of certain actions, and more espe-cially from the communication of qualities supposed to bederived from certain foods. (ii) Taboos are imposed in order tosecure against thieves the property of an individual, his ﬁelds,
tools, etc .... ’
The punishment for the violation of a taboo was no doubt
originally left to an internal, automatic agency: the violatedtaboo itself took vengeance. When, at a later stage, ideas of godsand spirits arose, with whom taboo became associated, the pen-alty was expected to follow automatically from the divine power.In other cases, probably as a result of a further evolution of theconcept, society itself took over the punishment of o ﬀenders,
whose conduct had brought their fellows into danger. Thus theearliest human penal systems may be traced back to taboo.
‘The violation of a taboo makes the o ﬀender himself
1In the present context this use of the term ‘taboo’ may be disregarded as not
being a primary one.taboo and emotional ambivalence 23t a b o o .... ’  C e r tain of the dangers brought into existence by the
violation may be averted by acts of atonement and puri ﬁcation.
The source of taboo is attributed to a peculiar magical power
which is inherent in persons and spirits and can be conveyed bythem through the medium of inanimate objects. ‘Persons orthings which are regarded as taboo may be compared to objectscharged with electricity; they are the seat of a tremendous powerwhich is transmissible by contact, and may be liberated withdestructive e ﬀect if the organisms which provoke its discharge
are too weak to resist it; the result of a violation of a taboodepends partly on the strength of the magical in ﬂuence inherent
in the taboo object or person, partly on the strength of theopposing mana of the violator of the taboo. Thus, kings and
chiefs are possessed of great power, and it is death for theirsubjects to address them directly; but a minister or other personof greater mana than common can approach them unharmed,
and can in turn be approached by their inferiors withoutr i s k ....  S o  too indirect taboos depend for their strength on the
mana of him who imposes them; if it is a chief or a priest, they
are more powerful than those imposed by a commonperson .... ’
It is no doubt the transmissibility of taboo which accounts for
the attempts to throw it o ﬀ by suitable puri ﬁcatory ceremonies.
Taboos may be permanent or temporary. Among the former
are those attaching to priests and chiefs, as well as to dead per-sons and anything belonging to them. Temporary taboos may beattached to certain particular states, such as menstruation andchild-birth, to warriors before and after an expedition, or tospecial activities such as ﬁshing and hunting. A general taboo
may (like a Papal Interdict) be imposed upon a whole region andmay then last for many years.
If I judge my readers’ feelings aright, I think it is safe to say that
in spite of all that they have now heard about taboo they still havetotem and taboo 24very little idea of the meaning of the term or of what place to
give it in their thoughts. This is no doubt due to the insu ﬃciency
of the information I have given them and to my having omittedto discuss the relation between taboo and superstition, the beliefin spirits, and religion. On the other hand, I am afraid a moredetailed account of what is known about taboo would have beeneven more confusing, and I can assure them that in fact thewhole subject is highly obscure.
What we are concerned with, then, is a number of prohibi-
tions to which these primitive races are subjected. Every sort ofthing is forbidden; but they have no idea why, and it does notoccur to them to raise the question. On the contrary, they submitto the prohibitions as though they were a matter of course andfeel convinced that any violation of them will be automaticallymet by the direst punishment. We have trustworthy stories ofhow any unwitting violation of one of these prohibitions is infact automatically punished. An innocent wrong-doer, who may,for instance, have eaten a forbidden animal, falls into a deepdepression, anticipates death and then dies in bitter earnest.These prohibitions are mainly directed against liberty of enjoy-ment and against freedom of movement and communication. Insome cases they have an intelligible meaning and are clearlyaimed at abstinences and renunciations. But in other cases theirsubject-matter is quite incomprehensible; they are concernedwith trivial details and seem to be of a purely ceremonial nature.
Behind all these prohibitions there seems to be something in
the nature of a theory that they are necessary because certainpersons and things are charged with a dangerous power, whichcan be transferred through contact with them, almost like aninfection. The quantity  of this dangerous attribute also plays a
part. Some people or things have more of it than others and thedanger is actually proportional to the di ﬀerence of potential of
the charges. The strangest fact seems to be that anyone whohas transgressed one of these prohibitions himself acquires thetaboo and emotional ambivalence 25characteristic of being prohibited—as though the whole of the
dangerous charge had been transferred over to him. This poweris attached to all special  individuals, such as kings, priests or new-
born babies, to all exceptional  states, such as the physical states of
menstruation, puberty or birth, and to all uncanny  things, such as
sickness and death and what is associated with them throughtheir power of infection or contagion.
The word ‘taboo’ denotes everything, whether a person or a
place or a thing or a transitory condition, which is the vehicle orsource of this mysterious attribute. It also denotes the prohibi-tions arising from the same attribute. And, ﬁnally, it has a con-
notation which includes alike ‘sacred’ and ‘above the ordinary’,
as well as ‘dangerous’, ‘unclean’ and ‘uncanny’.
This word and the system denoted by it give expression to a
group of mental attitudes and ideas which seem remote indeedfrom our understanding. In particular, there would seem to beno possibility of our coming into closer contact with themwithout examining the belief in ghosts and spirits which ischaracteristic of these low levels of culture.
Why, it may be asked at this point, should we concern our-
selves at all with this riddle of taboo? Not only, I think, because itis worth while trying to solve any psychological problem for its
own sake, but for other reasons as well. It may begin to dawn onus that the taboos of the savage Polynesians are after all not soremote from us as we were inclined to think at ﬁrst, that the
moral and conventional prohibitions by which we ourselves aregoverned may have some essential relationship with these primi-tive taboos and that an explanation of taboo might throw a lightupon the obscure origin of our own ‘categorical imperative’.
Accordingly, we shall be particularly interested to hear the views
of so notable an investigator as Wilhelm Wundt on the subject oftaboo, especially as he promises ‘to trace back the concept oftaboo to its earliest roots’ (1906, 301).totem and taboo 26Wundt writes of that concept that ‘it comprises all of the
usages in which is expressed a dread of certain objects related tocult ideas or of actions connected with them’. (Ibid., 237.) And,in another passage: ‘If we understand by it [taboo], in accord-ance with the general meaning of the word, every prohibition(whether laid down in usage or custom or in explicitly for-mulated laws) against touching an object or making use of itfor one’s own purposes or against using certain proscribedwords . . .’ then, he goes on, there can be no race and no level ofculture which has escaped the ill-e ﬀects of taboo. [Ibid., 301.]
Wundt next proceeds to explain why it seems to him advis-
able to study the nature of taboo in the primitive conditions ofthe Australian savages rather than in the higher culture of thePolynesian peoples. [Ibid., 302.] He divides the taboo prohib-itions among the Australians into three classes, according as theyaﬀect animals, human beings or other objects. The taboos on
animals, which consist essentially of prohibitions against killingand eating them, constitute the nucleus of T otemism . [Ibid., 303.]
1
The second class of taboos, those directed towards human
beings, are of an entirely di ﬀerent kind. They are restricted in the
ﬁrst instance to circumstances in which the person on whom the
taboo is imposed ﬁnds himself in an unusual situation. Thus
young men are taboo at their initiation ceremonies, women aretaboo during menstruation and immediately after giving birth;so too new-born babies, sick persons and, above all, the dead aretaboo. A man’s property which is in his constant use is perman-ently taboo to all other men: his clothing, for instance, his toolsand weapons. Included in a man’s most personal property, inAustralia, is the new name which he received when he was a boyat his initiation. It is taboo and must be kept secret. The thirdclass of taboos, which are imposed on trees, plants, houses andlocalities, are less stable. They appear to follow a rule that
1Cf. the ﬁrst and fourth essays in this volume.taboo and emotional ambivalence 27anything that is uncanny or provokes dread for any reason
becomes subject to taboo. [Ibid., 304.]
The modi ﬁcations shown by taboo in the richer culture of
Polynesia and the Malay Archipelago are, as Wundt himself isobliged to admit, not very profound. The more marked socialdiﬀerences among these peoples ﬁnd expression in the fact that
chiefs, kings and priests exercise a specially e ﬀective taboo and
are themselves subject to a taboo of the greatest force. [Ibid.,305–6.]
But, adds Wundt, the true sources of taboo lie deeper than in
the interests of the privileged classes: ‘they have their origin inthe source of the most primitive and at the same time mostlasting of human instincts—in fear of “demonic” powers.’(Ibid., 307.) ‘Taboo is originally nothing other than the objecti-ﬁed fear of the “demonic” power which is believed to lie hidden
in a tabooed object. The taboo prohibits anything that may pro-voke that power and commands that, if it has been injured,whether wittingly or unwittingly, the demon’s vengeance mustbe averted.’ [Ibid., 308.]
Little by little, we are told, taboo then grows into a force with
a basis of its own, independent of the belief in demons. Itdevelops into the rule of custom and tradition and ﬁnally of law.
‘But the unspoken command underlying all the prohibitions oftaboo, with their numberless variations according to the timeand place, is originally one and one only: “Beware of the wrathof demons!”’ [Loc. cit.]
Wundt informs us, then, that taboo is an expression and
derivative of the belief of primitive peoples in ‘demonic’ power.Later, he tells us, it freed itself from this root and remained apower simply because it was a power—from a kind of mental
conservatism. And thereafter it itself became the root of ourmoral precepts and of our laws. Though the ﬁrst of these asser-
tions may provoke little contradiction, I believe I shall beexpressing the thoughts of many readers when I say thattotem and taboo 28Wundt’s explanation comes as something of a disappointment.
This is surely not tracing back the concept of taboo to its sourcesor revealing its earliest roots. Neither fear nor demons can beregarded by psychology as ‘earliest’ things, impervious to anyattempt at discovering their antecedents. It would be anothermatter if demons really existed. But we know that, like gods,they are creations of the human mind: they were made by some-thing and out of something.
Wundt has important views on the double signi ﬁcance of
taboo, though these are not very clearly expressed. According tohim, the distinction between ‘sacred’ and ‘unclean’ did not existin the primitive beginnings of taboo. For that very reason thoseconcepts were at that stage without the peculiar signi ﬁcance
which they could only acquire when they became opposed toeach other. Animals, human beings or localities on which ataboo was imposed were ‘demonic’, not ‘sacred’, nor, therefore,
in the sense which was later acquired, ‘unclean’. It is preciselythis neutral and intermediate meaning—‘demonic’ or ‘whatmay not be touched’—that is appropriately expressed by theword ‘taboo’, since it stresses a characteristic which remainscommon for all time both to what is sacred and to what isunclean: the dread of contact with it. The persistence, however,of this important common characteristic is at the same timeevidence that the ground covered by the two was originally oneand that it was only as a result of further in ﬂuences that it
became di ﬀerentiated and eventually developed into opposites.
[Ibid., 309.]
According to Wundt, this original characteristic of taboo—
the belief in a ‘demonic’ power which lies hidden in an objectand which, if the object is touched or used unlawfully, takes itsvengeance by casting a spell over the wrong-doer—is stillwholly and solely ‘objecti ﬁed fear’. That fear has not yet split up
into the two forms into which it later develops: veneration andhorror. [Ibid., 310.]taboo and emotional ambivalence 29But how did this split take place? Through the transplanting,
so Wundt tells us, of the taboo ordinances from the sphere ofdemons into the sphere of belief in gods. [Ibid., 311.] The con-trast between ‘sacred’ and ‘unclean’ coincides with a successionof two stages of mythology. The earlier of these stages did notcompletely disappear when the second one was reached butpersisted in what was regarded as an inferior and eventually acontemptible form. [Ibid., 312.] It is, he says, a general law ofmythology that a stage which has been passed, for the veryreason that it has been overcome and driven under by a superiorstage, persists in an inferior form alongside the later one, so thatthe objects of its veneration turn into objects of horror. [Ibid.,313.]
The remainder of Wundt’s discussion deals with the relation
of the concept of taboo to puri ﬁcation and sacri ﬁce.
(2)
Anyone approaching the problem of taboo from the angle of
psycho-analysis, that is to say, of the investigation of theunconscious portion of the individual mind, will recognize,after a moment’s re ﬂection, that these phenomena are far from
unfamiliar to him. He has come across people who have createdfor themselves individual taboo prohibitions of this very kindand who obey them just as strictly as savages obey the communaltaboos of their tribe or society. If he were not already accus-tomed to describing such people as ‘obsessional’ patients, hewould ﬁnd ‘taboo sickness’ a most appropriate name for their
condition. Having learnt so much, however, about this obses-sional sickness from psycho-analytic examination—its clinicalætiology and the essence of its psychical mechanism—he canscarcely refrain from applying the knowledge he has thusacquired to the parallel sociological phenomenon.
A warning must be uttered at this point. The similaritytotem and taboo 30between taboo and obsessional sickness may be no more than a
matter of externals; it may apply only to the forms in which they
are manifested and not extend to their essential character. Naturedelights in making use of the same forms in the most variousbiological connections: as it does, for instance, in the appearanceof branch-like structures both in coral and in plants, and indeedin some forms of crystal and in certain chemical precipitates. Itwould obviously be hasty and unpro ﬁtable to infer the existence
of any internal relationship from such points of agreement asthese, which merely derive from the operation of the samemechanical causes. We shall bear this warning in mind, but weneed not be deterred by it from proceeding with ourcomparison.
The most obvious and striking point of agreement between
the obsessional prohibitions of neurotics and taboos is that theseprohibitions are equally lacking in motive and equally puzzlingin their origin. Having made their appearance at some unspeci-ﬁed moment, they are forcibly maintained by an irresistible fear.
No external threat of punishment is required, for there is aninternal certainty, a moral conviction, that any violation will leadto intolerable disaster. The most that an obsessional patient cansay on this point is that he has an unde ﬁned feeling that some
particular person in his environment will be injured as a result ofthe violation. Nothing is known of the nature of the injury; andindeed even this wretchedly small amount of information ismore often obtained in connection with the expiatory anddefensive actions which we shall have to discuss later than withthe prohibitions themselves.
As in the case of taboo, the principal prohibition, the nucleus
of the neurosis, is against touching; and thence it is sometimesknown as ‘touching phobia’ or ‘ délire du toucher ’. The prohibition
does not merely apply to immediate physical contact but has anextent as wide as the metaphorical use of the phrase ‘to come intaboo and emotional ambivalence 31contact with’. Anything that directs the patient’s thoughts to the
forbidden object, anything that brings him into intellectual con-tact with it, is just as much prohibited as direct physical contact.This same extension also occurs in the case of taboo.
The purpose of some of the prohibitions is immediately obvi-
ous. Others, on the contrary, strike us as incomprehensible,senseless and silly, and prohibitions of this latter sort aredescribed as ‘ceremonial’. This distinction, too, is found in theobservances of taboo. [See p. 21.]
Obsessional prohibitions are extremely liable to displacement.
They extend from one object to another along whatever pathsthe context may provide, and this new object then becomes, touse the apt expression of one of my women patients,‘impossible’—till at last the whole world lies under an embargoof ‘impossibility’. Obsessional patients behave as though the‘impossible’ persons and things were carriers of a dangerousinfection liable to be spread by contact on to everything in theirneighbourhood. I have already [p. 21] drawn attention to thesame characteristic capacity for contagion and transference inmy description of taboo. We know, too, that anyone who violatesa taboo by coming into contact with something that is taboobecomes taboo himself and that then no one may come intocontact with him.
I will now put side by side two instances of the transference
(or, as it is better to say, the displacement ) of a prohibition. One
of these is taken from the life of the Maoris and the otherfrom an observation of my own on a female obsessionalpatient.
‘A Maori chief would not blow a ﬁre with his mouth; for his
sacred breath would communicate its sanctity to the ﬁre, which
would pass it on to the pot on the ﬁre, which would pass it on to
the meat in the pot, which would pass it on to the man who atethe meat, which was in the pot, which stood on the ﬁre, which
was breathed on by the chief, so that the eater, infected by thetotem and taboo 32chief’s breath conveyed through these intermediaries, would
surely die.’1
My patient’s husband purchased a household article of some
kind and brought it home with him. She insisted that it shouldbe removed or it would make the room she lived in ‘impossible’.For she had heard that the article had been bought in a shopsituated in, let us say, ‘Smith’ Street.
2 ‘Smith’, however, was the
married name of a woman friend of hers who lived in a distanttown and whom she had known in her youth under her maidenname. This friend of hers was at the moment ‘impossible’ ortaboo. Consequently the article that had been purchased here inVienna was as taboo as the friend herself with whom she mustnot come into contact.
Obsessional prohibitions involve just as extensive renunci-
ations and restrictions in the lives of those who are subject tothem as do taboo prohibitions; but some of them can be lifted ifcertain actions are performed. Thereafter, these actions must be
performed: they become compulsive or obsessive acts, and therecan be no doubt that they are in the nature of expiation,penance, defensive measures and puri ﬁcation. The commonest
of these obsessive acts is washing in water (‘washing mania’).Some taboo prohibitions can be replaced in just the same way; orrather their violation can be made good by a similar ‘cere-monial’; and here again lustration with water is the preferredmethod.
Let us now summarize the points in which agreement
between taboo usages and obsessional symptoms is most clearlyshown: (1) the fact that the prohibitions lack any assignablemotive; (2) the fact that they are maintained by an internalnecessity; (3) the fact that they are easily displaceable and thatthere is a risk of infection from the prohibited object; and (4)
1Frazer (1911 b, 136) [quoting Taylor (1870, 165)].
2[‘Hirschengasse ’ and ‘ Hirsch ’ in the original.]taboo and emotional ambivalence 33the fact that they give rise to injunctions for the performance of
ceremonial acts.
Now both the clinical history and the psychical mechanism of
obsessional neurosis have become known to us through psycho-analysis. The clinical history of a typical case of ‘touching pho-bia’ is as follows. Quite at the beginning, in very early childhood,the patient shows a strong desire to touch, the aim of which is of a
far more specialized kind than one would have been inclined toexpect. This desire is promptly met by an external  prohibition
against carrying out that particular kind of touching.
1 The pro-
hibition is accepted, since it ﬁnds support from powerful internal
forces,2 and proves stronger than the instinct which is seeking to
express itself in the touching. In consequence, however, of thechild’s primitive psychical constitution, the prohibition does notsucceed in abolishing  the instinct. Its only result is to repress  the
instinct (the desire to touch) and banish it into the unconscious.Both the prohibition and the instinct persist: the instinct becauseit has only been repressed and not abolished, and the prohibitionbecause, if it ceased, the instinct would force its way throughinto consciousness and into actual operation. A situation is cre-ated which remains undealt with—a psychical ﬁxation—and
everything else follows from the continuing con ﬂict between the
prohibition and the instinct.
The principal characteristic of the psychological constellation
which becomes ﬁxed in this way is what might be described as
the subject’s ambivalent
3 attitude towards a single object, or rather
towards one act in connection with that object. He is constantlywishing to perform this act (the touching), [and looks on it as
1Both the desire and the prohibition relate to the child’s touching his own
genitals.
2That is, from the child’s loving relation to the authors of the prohibition.
3To borrow the apt term coined by Bleuler.totem and taboo 34his supreme enjoyment, but he must not perform it] and detests
it as well.1 The con ﬂict between these two currents cannot be
promptly settled because—there is no other way of putting it—they are localized in the subject’s mind in such a manner thatthey cannot come up against each other. The prohibition is nois-ily conscious, while the persistent desire to touch is unconsciousand the subject knows nothing of it. If it were not for this psy-chological factor, an ambivalence like this could neither last solong nor lead to such consequences.
In our clinical history of a case we have insisted that the
imposition of the prohibition in very early childhood is thedetermining point; a similar importance attaches in the sub-sequent developments to the mechanism of repression at thesame early age. As a result of the repression which has beenenforced and which involves a loss of memory—an amnesia—the motives for the prohibition (which is conscious) remainunknown; and all attempts at disposing of it by intellectual pro-cessess must fail, since they cannot ﬁnd any base of attack. The
prohibition owes its strength and its obsessive character pre-cisely to its unconscious opponent, the concealed andundiminished desire—that is to say, to an internal necessityinaccessible to conscious inspection. The ease with which theprohibition can be transferred and extended re ﬂects a process
which falls in with the unconscious desire and is greatly facili-tated by the psychological conditions that prevail in theunconscious. The instinctual desire is constantly shifting inorder to escape from the impasse  and endeavours to ﬁnd
substitutes—substitute objects and substitute acts—in place ofthe prohibited ones. In consequence of this, the prohibitionitself shifts about as well, and extends to any new aims whichthe forbidden impulse may adopt. Any fresh advance made by
1[From the Second Edition (1920) onwards, the words in square brackets
were, perhaps accidentally, omitted.]taboo and emotional ambivalence 35the repressed libido is answered by a fresh sharpening of the
prohibition. The mutual inhibition of the two con ﬂicting forces
produces a need for discharge, for reducing the prevailing ten-sion; and to this may be attributed the reason for the performanceof obsessive acts. In the case of a neurosis these are clearly com-promise actions: from one point of view they are evidences ofremorse, e ﬀorts at expiation, and so on, while on the other hand
they are at the same time substitutive acts to compensate theinstinct for what has been prohibited. It is a law of neuroticillness that these obsessive acts fall more and more under thesway of the instinct and approach nearer and nearer to theactivity which was originally prohibited.
Let us now make the experiment of treating taboo as though it
were of the same nature as an obsessional prohibition in one ofour patients. We must make it clear beforehand, however, thatmany of the taboo prohibitions that come under our notice areof a secondary, displaced and distorted kind, and that we shallhave to be satis ﬁed if we can throw only a little light on the most
fundamental and signi ﬁcant taboos. Moreover, the di ﬀerences
between the situation of a savage and of a neurotic are no doubtof suﬃcient importance to make any exact agreement impossible
and to prevent our carrying the comparison to the point ofidentity in every detail.
In the ﬁrst place, then, it must be said that there is no sense in
asking savages to tell us the real reason for their prohibitions—the origin of taboo. It follows from our postulates that theycannot answer, since their real reason must be ‘unconscious’. Wecan, however, reconstruct the history of taboo as follows on themodel of obsessional prohibitions. Taboos, we must suppose, areprohibitions of primæval antiquity which were at some timeexternally imposed upon a generation of primitive men; theymust, that is to say, no doubt have been impressed on themviolently by the previous generation. These prohibitions musttotem and taboo 36have concerned activities towards which there was a strong
inclination. They must then have persisted from generation togeneration, perhaps merely as a result of tradition transmittedthrough parental and social authority. Possibly, however, in latergenerations they may have become ‘organized’ as an inheritedpsychical endowment. Who can decide whether such things as‘innate ideas’ exist, or whether in the present instance they haveoperated, either alone or in conjunction with education, tobring about the permanent ﬁxing of taboos? But one thing
would certainly follow from the persistence of the taboo, namelythat the original desire to do the prohibited thing must also stillpersist among the tribes concerned. They must therefore have anambivalent attitude towards their taboos. In their unconsciousthere is nothing they would like more than to violate them, butthey are afraid to do so; they are afraid precisely because theywould like to, and the fear is stronger than the desire. The desireis unconscious, however, in every individual member of thetribe just as it is in neurotics.
The most ancient and important taboo prohibitions are the
two basic laws of totemism: not to kill the totem animal and toavoid sexual intercourse with members of the totem clan of theopposite sex.
These, then, must be the oldest and most powerful of human
desires. We cannot hope to understand this or test our hypoth-esis on these two examples, so long as we are totally ignorant ofthe meaning and origin of the totemic system. But the wordingof these two taboos and the fact of their concurrence will remindanyone acquainted with the ﬁndings of psycho-analytic investi-
gations on individuals of something quite de ﬁnite, which
psycho-analysts regard as the centre-point of childhood wishesand as the nucleus of neuroses.
1
1Cf. my forthcoming study upon totemism, to which I have referred more
than once in these pages (the fourth essay in this volume).taboo and emotional ambivalence 37The multiplicity of the manifestations of taboo, which have
led to the attempts at classi ﬁcation that I have already mentioned,
are reduced to a single unity by our thesis: the basis of taboo is aprohibited action, for performing which a strong inclinationexists in the unconscious.
We have heard [see p. 22], though without understanding it,
that anyone who does what is forbidden, that is, who violates ataboo, becomes taboo himself. How is this to be brought intoline with the fact that taboo attaches not only to a person whohas done what is forbidden but also to persons in particularstates, to the states themselves, as well as to impersonal objects?What can the dangerous attribute be which remains the sameunder all these di ﬀerent conditions? There is only one thing it
can be: the quality of exciting men’s ambivalence and tempting
them to transgress the prohibition.
Anyone who has violated a taboo becomes taboo himself
because he possesses the dangerous quality of tempting others tofollow his example: why should he be allowed to do what is
forbidden to others? Thus he is truly contagious in that everyexample encourages imitation, and for that reason he himselfmust be shunned.
But a person who has not violated any taboo may yet be
permanently or temporarily taboo because he is in a state whichpossesses the quality of arousing forbidden desires in others andof awakening a con ﬂict of ambivalence in them. The majority of
exceptional positions and exceptional states [see p. 22] are of thiskind and possess this dangerous power. The king or chief arousesenvy on account of his privileges: everyone, perhaps, would liketo be a king. Dead men, new-born babies and women menstruat-ing or in labour stimulate desires by their special helplessness; aman who has just reached maturity stimulates them by thepromise of new enjoyment. For that reason all of these personsand all of these states are taboo, since temptation must beresisted.totem and taboo 38Now, too, we can understand why the amounts of mana pos-
sessed by di ﬀerent persons can be subtracted from one another
and can to some extent cancel one another out [see p. 20]. Aking’s taboo is too strong for one of his subjects because thesocial di ﬀerence between them is too great. But a minister may
without any harm serve as an intermediary between them. If wetranslate this from the language of taboo into that of normalpsychology, it means something like this. A subject, who dreadsthe great temptation presented to him by contact with the king,can perhaps tolerate dealings with an o ﬃcial whom he does not
need to envy so much and whose position may even seem attain-able to him. A minister, again, can mitigate his envy of the kingby re ﬂecting on the power which he himself wields. So it comes
about that smaller di ﬀerences between the amounts of the
tempting magical force possessed by two people are less to befeared than greater ones.
It is equally clear why it is that the violation of certain taboo
prohibitions constitutes a social danger which must be punishedor atoned for by all the members of the community if they are
not all to su ﬀer injury [see p. 20]. If we replace the unconscious
desires by conscious impulses we shall see that the danger is areal one. It lies in the risk of imitation, which would quickly leadto the dissolution of the community. If the violation were notavenged by the other members they would become aware thatthey wanted to act in the same way as the transgressor.
We cannot be surprised at the fact that, in the restrictions of
taboo, touching plays a part similar to the one which it plays in‘touching phobias’, though the secret meaning of the prohibi-tion cannot be of such a specialized nature in taboo as it is in theneurosis. Touching is the ﬁrst step towards obtaining any sort of
control over, or attempting to make use of, a person or object.
We have translated the contagious power inherent in taboo
into the possession of some attribute likely to produce tempta-tion or encourage imitation. This does not appear to tally withtaboo and emotional ambivalence 39the fact that the contagious character of taboo is shown chie ﬂy
by its transmissibility on to material objects, which thenthemselves become carriers of taboo.
This transmissibility of taboo is a re ﬂection of the tendency,
on which we have already remarked, for the unconsciousinstinct in the neurosis to shift constantly along associative pathson to new objects. Our attention is thus directed to the fact thatthe dangerous magical force of mana corresponds to two powers
of a more realistic sort: the power of reminding a man of hisown prohibited wishes and the apparently more important oneof inducing him to transgress the prohibition in obedience tothose wishes. These two functions can be reduced to one, how-ever, if we suppose that in a primitive mind the awakening of thememory of a forbidden action is naturally linked with theawakening of an impulse to put that action into e ﬀect. Thus
recollection and temptation come together again. It must beadmitted, too, that, in so far as the example of a man transgress-ing a prohibition tempts another man to do the same, disobedi-ence to prohibitions spreads like a contagion, in just the sameway as a taboo is transferred from a person to a material objectand from one material object to another.
If the violation of a taboo can be made good by atonement or
expiation, which involve the renunciation of some possession orsome freedom, this proves that obedience to the taboo injunc-tion meant in itself the renunciation of something desirable.Emancipation from one renunciation is made up for by theimposition of another one elsewhere. This leads us to concludethat atonement is a more fundamental factor than puri ﬁcation in
the ceremonials of taboo.
I will now sum up the respects in which light has been thrown
on the nature of taboo by comparing it with the obsessionalprohibitions of neurotics. Taboo is a primæval prohibition for-cibly imposed (by some authority) from outside, and directedtotem and taboo 40against the most powerful longings to which human beings are
subject. The desire to violate it persists in their unconscious;those who obey the taboo have an ambivalent attitude to whatthe taboo prohibits. The magical power that is attributed totaboo is based on the capacity for arousing temptation; and itacts like a contagion because examples are contagious andbecause the prohibited desire in the unconscious shifts from onething to another. The fact that the violation of a taboo can beatoned for by a renunciation shows that renunciation lies at thebasis of obedience to taboo.
(3)
What we now want to discover is how much value is to be
attributed to the parallel we have drawn between taboo andobsessional neurosis and to the view of taboo which we havebased on that parallel. Their value must clearly depend onwhether the view we have put forward has any advantages overothers, and whether it gives us a clearer understanding of taboothan we could otherwise reach. We may be inclined to feel thatwe have given su ﬃcient evidence of the applicability of our
view in what has already been said; yet we must attempt tostrengthen the evidence by entering into our explanation oftaboo prohibitions and usages in greater detail.
There is also another path open to us. We can start an inquiry
as to whether some of the hypotheses which we have carriedover from neuroses to taboo or some of the results to which thatprocedure has led us may not be directly veri ﬁable in the phe-
nomena of taboo. But we must decide what we are to look for.Our assertion that taboo originated in a primæval prohibitionimposed at one time or other by some external authority isobviously incapable of demonstration. What we shall ratherendeavour to con ﬁrm, therefore, are the psychological
determinants of taboo, which we have learnt to know fromtaboo and emotional ambivalence 41obsessional neurosis. How did we arrive at our knowledge of
these psychological factors in the case of the neurosis? Throughthe analytical study of its symptoms, and particularly of obses-sional acts, defensive measures and obsessional commands.We found that they showed every sign of being derived fromambivalent  impulses, either corresponding simultaneously to both
a wish and a counter-wish or operating predominantly on behalfof one of the two opposing trends. If, now, we could succeed in
demonstrating that ambivalence, that is, the ascendancy of oppos-ing trends, is also to be found in the observances of taboo, or if wecould point to some of them which, like obsessional acts, givesimultaneous expression to both currents, we should have estab-lished the psychological agreement between taboo and obses-sional neurosis in what is perhaps their most important feature.
The two fundamental prohibitions of taboo are, as I have
already remarked, inaccessible to our analysis owing to theirconnection with totemism; while certain others of its injunc-tions are of a secondary nature and consequently useless for ourpurpose. For taboo has become the ordinary method of legisla-tion in the communities a ﬀected by it and it has come to serve
social purposes which are certainly more recent than tabooitself: such, for instance, are the taboos imposed by chiefs andpriests for the protection of their own property and privileges.There nevertheless remain a large group of observances onwhich our investigation can be made. From these I shall selectthe taboos attaching ( a) to enemies, ( b) to chiefs and ( c) to the
dead; and I shall take the material for our examination from theexcellent collection included by Frazer in T aboo and the Perils of the
Soul (1911 b), the second part of his great work The Golden Bough.
(a) The treatment of enemies
We may be inclined to suppose that savage and half-savage races
are guilty of uninhibited and ruthless cruelty towards theirtotem and taboo 42enemies. We shall be greatly interested to learn, then, that even
in their case the killing of a man is governed by a number ofobservances which are included among the usages of taboo.These observances fall easily into four groups. They demand (1)the appeasement of the slain enemy, (2) restrictions upon theslayer, (3) acts of expiation and puri ﬁcation by him and (4)
certain ceremonial observances. Our incomplete information onthe subject does not enable us to determine with certainty howgeneral or the reverse these usages may be among the peoplesconcerned; but for our purposes this is a matter of indi ﬀerence.
It may safely be assumed, in any case, that what we have beforeus are not isolated peculiarities but widespread usages.
The rites of appeasement  performed in the island of Timor, when a
warlike expedition has returned in triumph bringing the headsof the vanquished foe, are particularly remarkable, since in add-ition to them the leader of the expedition is submitted to severerestrictions (see below, p. 39). On the occasion of the exped-ition’s return, sacri ﬁces are o ﬀered to appease the souls of the
men whose heads have been taken. ‘The people think that somemisfortune would befall the victor were such o ﬀerings omitted.
Moreover, a part of the ceremony consists of a dance accom-panied by a song, in which the death of the slain man is lam-ented and his forgiveness is entreated. “Be not angry”, they say,“because your head is here with us; had we been less lucky, ourheads might now have been exposed in your village. We haveoﬀered the sacri ﬁce to appease you. Your spirit may now rest and
leave us in peace. Why were you our enemy? Would it not havebeen better that we should remain friends? Then your bloodwould not have been spilt and your head would not have beencut o ﬀ.” ’
1 The same is true of the people of Paloo, in Celebes.
So, too, ‘the Gallas [of East Africa] returning from war sacri ﬁce
1Frazer (1911 b, 166) [quoting Gramberg (1872, 216)].taboo and emotional ambivalence 43to the jinn or guardian spirits of their slain foes before they will
re-enter their own houses’.1
Other peoples have found a means for changing their former
enemies after their death into guardians, friends and benefactors.This method lies in treating their severed heads with a ﬀection, as
some of the savage races of Borneo boast of doing. When the SeaDyaks of Sarawak bring home a head from a successful head-hunting expedition, for months after its arrival it is treated withthe greatest consideration and addressed with all the names ofendearment of which their language is capable. The most daintymorsels of food are thrust into its mouth, delicacies of all kindsand even cigars. The head is repeatedly implored to hate itsformer friends and to love its new hosts since it has now becomeone of them. It would be a great mistake to suppose that theseobservances, which strike us as so horrible, are performed withany intention of ridicule.
2
In several of the savage tribes of North America observers have
been struck by the mourning over enemies who have been killedand scalped. When a Choctaw had killed an enemy, he went intomourning for a month during which he was subjected to severerestrictions; and the Dacotas had similar practices. When theOsages, reports a witness, have mourned over their own dead,‘they will mourn for the foe just as if he was a friend’.
3
Before considering the remaining classes of taboo usages in con-nection with enemies, we must deal with an obvious objection.It will be argued against us, with Frazer and others, that thegrounds for such rites of appeasement are simple enough andhave nothing to do with any such thing as ‘ambivalence’. Thesepeoples are dominated by a superstitious fear of the ghosts of the
1Frazer (loc. cit.), quoting Paulitschke (1893–6 [ 2, 50, 136]).
2Frazer (1914, 1, 295), quoting Low (1848 [206]).
3Frazer (1911 b, 181), quoting Dorsey (1884 [126]).totem and taboo 44slain—a fear which was not unknown in classical antiquity and
which was put upon the stage by the great English dramatist inthe hallucinations of Macbeth and Richard III. All the rites ofappeasement follow logically from this superstition, as well asthe restrictions and acts of expiation which will be discussedpresently. This view is also supported by the fourth group ofthese observances, which can only be explained as attempts atdriving away the ghosts of the victims that are pursuing theirmurderers.
1 In addition to this, the savages openly admit their
fear of the ghosts of dead enemies and themselves attribute to itthe taboo usages which we are discussing.
This objection is indeed an obvious one, and if it covered the
whole ground we could save ourselves the trouble of any furtherattempt at an explanation. I shall put o ﬀ dealing with it until
later, and for the moment I will merely state the alternative viewwhich is derived from the hypothesis based upon our earlierdiscussions of taboo. The conclusion that we must draw from allthese observances is that the impulses which they expresstowards an enemy are not solely hostile ones. They are alsomanifestations of remorse, of admiration for the enemy, and of abad conscience for having killed him. It is di ﬃcult to resist the
notion that, long before a table of laws was handed down by anygod, these savages were in possession of a living commandment.‘Thou shalt not kill’, a violation of which would not gounpunished.
Let us now return to the other three groups of taboo obser-
vances. Restrictions  placed upon a victorious slayer are unusually
frequent and as a rule severe. In Timor (cf. the rites of appease-ment described above, on p.37) the leader of the expedition isforbidden ‘to return at once to his own house. A special hut is
1Frazer (1911 b, 169–74). These ceremonies consist of beating on shields,
shouting and screaming, making noises with musical instruments, etc.taboo and emotional ambivalence 45prepared for him, in which he has to reside for two months,
undergoing bodily and spiritual puri ﬁcation. During this time
he may not go to his wife nor feed himself; the food must be putinto his mouth by another person.’
1 In some Dyak tribes men
returning from a successful expedition are obliged to keep tothemselves for several days and abstain from various kinds offood; they may not touch iron nor have any intercourse withwomen. In Logea, an island in the neighbourhood of NewGuinea, ‘men who have killed or assisted in killing enemies shutthemselves up for about a week in their houses. They must avoidall intercourse with their wives and friends, and they may nottouch food with their hands. They may eat vegetable food only,which is brought to them cooked in special pots. The intentionof these restrictions is to guard the men against the smell of theblood of the slain; for it is believed that if they smelt the bloodthey would fall ill and die. In the Toaripi or Motumotu tribe ofsouth-eastern New Guinea a man who has killed another maynot go near his wife, and may not touch food with his ﬁngers.
He is fed by others, and only with certain kinds of food. Theseobservances last till the new moon.’ (Frazer, 1911 b, 167.)
I shall not attempt to give a complete catalogue of the instances
quoted by Frazer of restrictions imposed upon victoriousmanslayers. I will only remark upon a few more such cases inwhich their taboo character is particularly marked or in whichthe restrictions are accompanied by expiation, puri ﬁcation and
other ceremonials.
‘Among the Monumbos of German New Guinea anyone who
has slain a foe in war becomes thereby “unclean” ’—the sameterm being applied to women who are menstruating or in child-bed. He ‘must remain a long time in the men’s club-house,while the villagers gather round him and celebrate his victory
1Frazer (1911 b, 166), quoting Müller (1857 [ 2, 252]).totem and taboo 46with dance and song. He may touch nobody, not even his own
wife and children; if he were to touch them it is believed thatthey would be covered with sores. He becomes clean again bywashing and using other modes of puri ﬁcation.’ [Ibid., 169.]
‘Among the Natchez of North America young braves who had
taken their ﬁrst scalps were obliged to observe certain rules of
abstinence for six months. They might not sleep with their wivesnor eat ﬂesh; their only food was ﬁsh and hasty-pudding ....
When a Choctaw had killed an enemy and taken his scalp, hewent into mourning for a month, during which he might notcomb his hair, and if his head itched he might not scratch itexcept with a little stick which he wore fastened to his wrist forthe purpose.’ [Ibid., 181.]
‘When a Pima Indian had killed an Apache, he had to go
through severe ceremonies of puri ﬁcation and atonement. Dur-
ing a sixteen-day fast he might not touch meat nor salt, nor lookon a blazing ﬁre, nor speak to a human being. He lived alone in
the woods, waited on by an old woman, who brought him hisscanty dole of food. He bathed often in the river and (as a sign ofmourning) kept his head covered with a plaster of mud. On theseventeenth day there was a public ceremony of solemn puri ﬁca-
tion of the man and his weapons. Since the Pima Indians took thetaboo on killing much more seriously than their enemies anddid not, like them, postpone the expiation and puri ﬁcation till
the end of the expedition, their warlike e ﬃciency su ﬀered
greatly from their moral strictness, or piety, if that term ispreferred. Despite their extreme courage, the Americansfound them unsatisfactory allies in their operations against theApaches.’ [Ibid., 182–4.]
However much the details and variations of the ceremonies of
expiation and puri ﬁcation after the slaying of enemies might be
of interest for deeper research into the subject, I shall break o ﬀ
at this point, since for our present purpose they have nothingmore to tell us. I may perhaps suggest that the temporary ortaboo and emotional ambivalence 47permanent isolation of professional executioners, which has
persisted to the present day, may belong in this connection. Theposition of the public hangman in mediæval society o ﬀers a
good picture of the workings of taboo among savages.
1
In the accepted explanation of all these observances of appease-ment, restriction, expiation and puri ﬁcation, two principles are
combined: the extension of the taboo from the slain man on toeverything that has come in contact with him and the fear of theslain man’s ghost. How these two factors are to be combinedwith each other to explain the ceremonials, whether they are tobe regarded as of equal weight, whether one is primary and theother secondary, and if so which—none of these questionsreceives an answer, and indeed it would be hard to ﬁnd one. We,
on the other hand, can lay stress on the unity of our view, which
derives all of these observances from emotional ambivalencetowards the enemy.
(b) The taboo upon rulers
The attitude of primitive peoples to their chiefs, kings and
priests is governed by two basic principles which seem to becomplementary rather than contradictory. A ruler ‘must notonly be guarded, he must also be guarded against’. (Frazer, 1911 b,
132.) Both of these ends are secured by innumerable tabooobservances. We know already why it is that rulers must beguarded against. It is because they are vehicles of the mysteriousand dangerous magical power which is transmitted by contactlike an electric charge and which brings death and ruin to any-one who is not protected by a similar charge. Any immediate orindirect contact with this dangerous sacred entity is therefore
1Further examples of these practices will be found in Frazer (1911 b,
165–90) in the section upon ‘Manslayers tabooed’.totem and taboo 48avoided; and, if it cannot be avoided, some ceremonial is devised
to avert the dreaded consequences. The Nubas of East Africa, forinstance, ‘believe that they would die if they entered the house oftheir priestly king; however they can evade the penalty of theirintrusion by baring the left shoulder and getting the king to layhis hand on it.’ [Loc. cit.] Here we are met by the remarkable factthat contact with the king is a remedy and protection against thedangers provoked by contact with the king. No doubt, however,there is a contrast to be drawn between the remedial power of atouch made deliberately by the king and the danger which arisesif he is touched—a contrast between a passive and an activerelation to the king.
For examples of the healing power of the royal touch there is
no need to resort to savages. The kings of England, in times thatare not yet remote, enjoyed the power of curing scrofula, whichwas known accordingly as ‘the King’s Evil’. Queen Elizabethexercised this royal prerogative no less than her successors.Charles I is said to have cured a hundred patients at a stroke in1633. But it was after the Restoration of the monarchy under hisdissolute son, Charles II, that the royal cures of scrofula reachedtheir climax. In the course of his reign he is reputed to havetouched close upon a hundred thousand persons. The crowd ofthose in search of cure used to be so great that on one occasionsix or seven of those who came to be healed were trampled todeath. The sceptical William of Orange, who became King ofEngland after the dismissal of the Stuarts, refused to lend himselfto these magical practices. On the only occasion on which hewas persuaded into laying his hands on a patient, he said to him:‘God give you better health and more sense.’ (Frazer, 1911 a, 1,
368–70.)
The stories which follow are evidence of the fearful e ﬀects of
active contact made, even unintentionally, with a king or any-thing belonging to him. ‘It once happened that a New Zealandchief of high rank and great sanctity had left the remains of histaboo and emotional ambivalence 49dinner by the wayside. A slave, a stout, hungry fellow, coming up
after the chief had gone, saw the un ﬁnished dinner, and ate it up
without asking questions. Hardly had he ﬁnished when he was
informed by a horror-stricken spectator that the food of whichhe had eaten was the chief’s.’ He was a strong, courageous man,but ‘no sooner did he hear the fatal news than he was seizedwith the most extraordinary convulsions and cramp in the stom-ach, which never ceased till he died, about sundown the sameday’.
1 ‘A Maori woman having eaten of some fruit, and being
afterwards told that the fruit had been taken from a tabooedplace, exclaimed that the spirit of the chief, whose sanctity hadbeen thus profaned, would kill her. This was in the afternoon,and next day by twelve o’clock she was dead.’
2 ‘A Maori chief’s
tinder-box was once the means of killing several persons; for,having been lost by him, and found by some men who used it tolight their pipes, they died of fright on learning to whom it hadbelonged.’
3
It is not to be wondered at that a need was felt for isolating
such dangerous persons as chiefs and priests from the rest of thecommunity—to build a barrier round them which would makethem inaccessible. It may begin to dawn on us that this barrier,originally erected for the observance of taboo, exists to this dayin the form of court ceremonial.
But perhaps the major part of this taboo upon rulers is not
derived from the need for protection against  them. The second
reason for the special treatment of privileged persons—the needto provide protection for them against the threat of danger—has
had an obvious part in creating taboos and so of giving rise tocourt etiquette.
The need to protect the king from every possible form of
1Frazer (1911 b, 134–5), quoting A Pakeha Maori (1884 [96 f.]).
2Frazer (loc. cit.), quoting Brown (1845 [76]).
3Frazer (loc. cit.) [quoting Taylor (1870, 164)].totem and taboo 50danger follows from his immense importance to his subjects,
whether for weal or woe. It is his person which, strictly speak-ing, regulates the whole course of existence. ‘The people have tothank him for the rain and sunshine which foster the fruits ofthe earth, for the wind which brings ships to their coasts, andeven for the solid ground beneath their feet.’ (Frazer, 1911 b, 7.)
These rulers among savage peoples possess a degree of power
and a capacity to confer bene ﬁts which are an attribute only of
gods, and with which at later stages of civilization only the mostservile of courtiers would pretend to credit them.
It must strike us as self-contradictory that persons of such
unlimited power should need to be protected so carefully fromthe threat of danger; but that is not the only contradiction shownin the treatment of royal personages among savage peoples. Forthese peoples also think it necessary to keep a watch on theirking to see that he makes a proper use of his powers; they feel byno means convinced of his good intentions or conscientious-ness. Thus an element of distrust may be traced among thereasons for the taboo observances that surround the king. ‘Theidea’, writes Frazer (1911 b, 7 f.), ‘that early kingdoms are des-
potisms in which the people exist only for the sovereign, iswholly inapplicable to the monarchies we are considering. Onthe contrary, the sovereign in them exists only for his subjects;his life is only valuable so long as he discharges the duties of hisposition by ordering the course of nature for his people’s bene-ﬁt. So soon as he fails to do so, the care, the devotion, the
religious homage which they had hitherto lavished on him ceaseand are changed into hatred and contempt; he is dismissedignominiously, and may be thankful if he escapes with his life.Worshipped as a god one day, he is killed as a criminal the next.But in this changed behaviour of the people there is nothingcapricious or inconstant. On the contrary, their conduct isentirely of a piece. If their king is their god, he is or should betaboo and emotional ambivalence 51also their preserver; and if he will not preserve them, he must
make room for another who will. So long, however, as heanswers their expectations, there is no limit to the care whichthey take of him, and which they compel him to take of himself.A king of this sort lives hedged in by a ceremonious etiquette, anetwork of prohibitions and observances, of which the intentionis not to contribute to his dignity, much less to his comfort, butto restrain him from conduct which, by disturbing the harmonyof nature, might involve himself, his people, and the universe inone common catastrophe. Far from adding to his comfort, theseobservances, by trammelling his every act, annihilate his free-dom and often render the very life, which it is their object topreserve, a burden and sorrow to him.’
One of the most glaring instances of a sacred ruler being
fettered and paralysed in this way by taboo ceremonials is to befound in the mode of life of the Mikado of Japan in earliercenturies. An account written more than two hundred years agoreports that the Mikado ‘thinks it would be very prejudicial tohis dignity and holiness to touch the ground with his feet; forthis reason, when he intends to go anywhere, he must be carriedthither on men’s shoulders. Much less will they su ﬀer that he
should expose his sacred person to the open air, and the sun isnot thought worthy to shine on his head. There is such a holi-ness ascribed to all parts of his body that he dares to cut o ﬀ
neither his hair, nor his beard, nor his nails. However, lest heshould grow too dirty, they may clean him in the night when heis asleep; because, they say, that which is taken from his body atthat time hath been stolen from him and that such a theft dothnot prejudice his holiness or dignity. In ancient times he wasobliged to sit on the throne for some hours every morning, withthe imperial crown on his head, but to sit altogether like a statue,without stirring either hands or feet, head or eyes, nor indeedany part of his body, because, by this means, it was thought thathe could preserve peace and tranquillity in his empire; for if,totem and taboo 52unfortunately, he turned himself on one side or the other, or if
he looked a good while towards any part of his dominions, itwas apprehended that war, famine, ﬁre, or some other great
misfortune was near at hand to desolate the country.’
1
Some of the taboos laid upon barbarian kings remind one
vividly of the restrictions imposed upon murderers. Thus inWest Africa, ‘at Shark Point near Cape Padron, in Lower Guinea,lives the priestly king Kukulu, alone in a wood. He may nottouch a woman nor leave his house; indeed he may not even quithis chair, in which he is obliged to sleep sitting, for if he laydown no wind would arise and navigation would be stopped. Heregulates storms, and in general maintains a wholesome andequable state of the atmosphere.’ The same writer says of Loango(in the same part of the world) that the more powerful a king is,the more taboos he is bound to observe.
2 The heir to the throne
is also subject to them from infancy; their number increases ashe advances in life, till at the moment that he ascends the thronehe is positively su ﬀocated by them.
Our space will not allow nor does our interest require us to
enter further into a description of the taboos associated with thedignity of kings and priests. I will only add that the principalpart is played in them by restrictions upon freedom of move-ment and upon diet. Two examples of taboo ceremonials occur-ring in civilized communities of a far higher level of culture willserve to show, however, what a conservative e ﬀect upon ancient
usages is exercised by contact with these privileged personages.
The Flamen Dialis, the high priest of Jupiter in ancient Rome,
was obliged to observe an extraordinary number of taboos. He‘might not ride or even touch a horse, nor see an army underarms, nor wear a ring which was not broken, nor have a knot onany part of his garments; . . . he might not touch wheaten ﬂour
1Kaempfer (1727 [ 1, 150]), quoted by Frazer (1911 b, 3 f.).
2Frazer (1911 b, 5 and 8), quoting Bastian (1874–5 [ 1, 287 and 355]).taboo and emotional ambivalence 53or leavened bread; he might not touch or even name a goat, a
dog, raw meat, beans, and ivy; . . . his hair could be cut only by afree man and with a bronze knife, and his hair and nails whencut had to be buried under a lucky tree; . . . he might not touch adead body; . . . he might not be uncovered in the open air’, andso on. ‘His wife, the Flaminica, had to observe nearly the samerules, and others of her own besides. She might not ascend morethan three steps of the kind of staircase called Greek; at a certainfestival she might not comb her hair; the leather of her shoesmight not be made from a beast that had died a natural death,but only from one that had been slain or sacri ﬁced; if she heard
thunder she was tabooed till she had o ﬀered an expiatory
sacriﬁce.’ (Frazer, 1911 b, 13 f.)
The ancient kings of Ireland were subject to a number of
exceedingly strange restrictions. If these were obeyed, every kindof blessing would descend upon the country, but if they wereviolated, disasters of every kind would visit it. A complete list ofthese taboos is contained in the Book of Rights , the two oldest
manuscript copies of which date from 1390 and 1418. Theprohibitions are of the most detailed character, and refer to spe-ciﬁc actions at speci ﬁc places at speci ﬁc times: the king, for
instance, may not stay in a certain town on a particular day of theweek; he may not cross a certain river at a particular hour of theday; he may not encamp for nine days on a certain plain, and soon. (Frazer, 1911 b, 11 f.)
Among many savage peoples the severity of these taboo
restrictions upon priestly kings has led to consequences whichhave been important historically and are of particular interestfrom our point of view. The dignity of their position ceased to bean enviable thing, and those who were o ﬀered it often took
every possible means of escaping it. Thus in Cambodia, wherethere are kingships of Fire and Water, it is often necessary toforce successors into accepting these distinctions. On Niue ¯ or
Savage Island, a coral island in the South Paci ﬁc, the monarchytotem and taboo 54actually came to an end because no one could be induced to take
over the responsible and dangerous o ﬃce. ‘In some parts of West
Africa, when the king dies, a family council is secretly held todetermine his successor. He on whom the choice falls is sud-denly seized, bound, and thrown into the fetish-house, where heis kept in durance till he consents to accept the crown. Some-times the heir ﬁnds means of evading the honour which it is
thought to thrust upon him; a ferocious chief has been known togo about constantly armed, resolute to resist by force anyattempt to set him on the throne.’
1 Among the natives of Sierra
Leone the objection to accepting the honour of kingship becameso great that most tribes were obliged to choose foreigners astheir kings.
Frazer (1911 b, 17–25) attributes to these circumstances the
fact that in the course of history there eventually came about adivision of the original priestly kingship into a spiritual and atemporal power. Weighed down by the burden of their sacredoﬃce, kings became unable to exert their dominance in real
aﬀairs and these were left in the hands of inferior but practical
persons, who were ready to renounce the honours of kingship.These, then, became the temporal rulers, while spiritualsupremacy, deprived of any practical signi ﬁcance, was left to the
former taboo kings. It is familiar knowledge how far thishypothesis ﬁnds con ﬁrmation in the history of old Japan.
If we take a general survey of the relations of primitive men to
their rulers, we are left with an expectation that we shall have nogreat di ﬃculty in advancing from a description of them to a
psycho-analytic understanding of them. Those relations are of acomplex kind and not free from contradictions. Rulers areallowed great privileges, which coincide exactly with the tabooprohibitions imposed on other people. They are privileged
1Frazer (1911 b, 17 f.), quoting Bastian (1874–5 [ 1, 354 and 2, 9]).taboo and emotional ambivalence 55persons: they may do or enjoy precisely what other people are
forbidden by taboo. As against this freedom, however, we ﬁnd
that they are restricted by other taboos from which commonpeople are exempt. Here we have a ﬁrst contrast—a contradic-
tion, almost—the fact, that is, of the same individual being bothmore free and more restricted. Again, they are regarded as pos-sessing extraordinary powers of magic, so that people are afraidof coming into contact with their persons or their property,while on the other hand the most bene ﬁcial consequences are
expected from that same contact. Here there seems to be another,particularly glaring, contradiction; but, as we have already seen,it is only an apparent one. Contacts originating from the kinghimself are healing and protective; the dangerous contacts arethose e ﬀected by common men upon the king or his
belongings—probably because they may hint at aggressiveimpulses. Yet another contradiction, and one not so easilyresolved, is to be found in the fact that the ruler is believed toexercise great authority over the forces of Nature, but that he hasto be most carefully protected against the threat of danger—asthough his own power, which can do so much, cannot do this.The situation is made still more di ﬃcult by the fact that the ruler
cannot be trusted to make use of his immense powers in theright way, that is, for the bene ﬁt of his subjects and for his own
protection. Thus people distrust him and feel justi ﬁed in keeping
a watch on him. The etiquette of taboos to which the king’swhole life is subjected serves all these protective purposes atonce: his own protection from dangers and the protection of hissubjects from the dangers with which he threatens them.
It seems plausible to explain the complicated and contra-
dictory attitude of primitive peoples to their rulers in somesuch way as the following. For superstitious and other reasons, avariety of di ﬀerent impulses ﬁnd expression in relation to kings;
and each of these impulses is developed to an extreme pointwithout regard to the others. This gives rise to contradictions—totem and taboo 56by which, incidentally, a savage intellect is as little disturbed as is
a highly civilized one when it comes to such matters as religionor ‘loyalty’.
So far so good; but the technique of psycho-analysis allows us
to go into the question further and to enter more into the detailsof these various impulses. If we submit the recorded facts toanalysis, as though they formed part of the symptoms presentedby a neurosis, our starting-point must be the excessive appre-hensiveness and solicitude which is put forward as the reason forthe taboo ceremonials. The occurrence of excessive solicitude ofthis kind is very common in neuroses, and especially in obses-sional neuroses, with which our comparison is chie ﬂy drawn.
We have come to understand its origin quite clearly. It appearswherever, in addition to a predominant feeling of a ﬀection,
there is also a contrary, but unconscious, current of hostility—astate of a ﬀairs which represents a typical instance of an ambiva-
lent emotional attitude. The hostility is then shouted down, as itwere, by an excessive intensi ﬁcation of the a ﬀection, which is
expressed as solicitude and becomes compulsive, because itmight otherwise be inadequate to perform its task of keeping theunconscious contrary current of feeling under repression. Everypsychoanalyst knows from experience with what certainty thisexplanation of solicitous over-a ﬀection is found to apply even in
the most unlikely circumstances—in cases, for instance, ofattachments between a mother and child or between a devotedmarried couple. If we now apply this to the case of privilegedpersons, we shall realize that alongside of the veneration, andindeed idolization, felt towards them, there is in theunconscious an opposing current of intense hostility; that, infact, as we expected, we are faced by a situation of emotionalambivalence. The distrust which provides one of the unmistak-able elements in kingly taboos would thus be another, moredirect, expression of the same unconscious hostility. Indeed,owing to the variety of outcomes of a con ﬂict of this kind whichtaboo and emotional ambivalence 57are reached among di ﬀerent peoples, we are not at a loss for
examples in which the existence of this hostility is still moreobviously shown. ‘The savage Timmes of Sierra Leone’, we learnfrom Frazer,
1 ‘who elect their king, reserve to themselves the
right of beating him on the eve of his coronation; and they availthemselves of this constitutional privilege with such heartygoodwill that sometimes the unhappy monarch does not longsurvive his elevation to the throne. Hence when the leadingchiefs have a spite at a man and wish to rid themselves of him,they elect him king.’ Even in glaring instances like this, however,the hostility is not admitted as such, but masquerades as aceremonial.
Another side of the attitude of primitive peoples towards their
rulers recalls a procedure which is common in neuroses gener-ally but comes into the open in what are known as delusions ofpersecution. The importance of one particular person isimmensely exaggerated and his absolute power is magni ﬁed to
the most improbable degree, in order that it may be easier tomake him responsible for everything disagreeable that thepatient may experience. Savages are really behaving in just thesame way with their kings when they ascribe to them powerover rain and sunshine, wind and weather, and then deposethem or kill them because Nature disappoints their hopes of asuccessful hunt or a rich harvest. The model upon which para-noiacs base their delusions of persecution is the relation of achild to his father. A son’s picture of his father is habituallyclothed with excessive powers of this kind, and it is found thatdistrust of the father is intimately linked with admiration forhim. When a paranoiac turns the ﬁgure of one of his associates
into a ‘persecutor’, he is raising him to the rank of a father: he isputting him into a position in which he can blame him for allhis misfortunes. Thus this second analogy between savages and
1Frazer (1911 b, 18), quoting Zweifel and Moustier (1880 [28]).totem and taboo 58neurotics gives us a glimpse of the truth that much of a savage’s
attitude to his ruler is derived from a child’s infantile attitude tohis father.
But the strongest support for our e ﬀort to equate taboo pro-
hibitions with neurotic symptoms is to be found in the tabooceremonials themselves, the e ﬀect of which upon the position of
royalty has already been discussed. These ceremonials unmistak-ably reveal their double meaning and their derivation fromambivalent impulses, as soon as we are ready to allow that theresults which they bring about were intended from the ﬁrst. The
taboo does not only pick out the king and exalt him above allcommon mortals, it also makes his existence a torment and anintolerable burden and reduces him to a bondage far worse thanthat of his subjects. Here, then, we have an exact counterpart ofthe obsessional act in the neurosis, in which the suppressedimpulse and the impulse that suppresses it ﬁnd simultaneous
and common satisfaction. The obsessional act is ostensibly  a pro-
tection against the prohibited act; but actually , in our view, it is a
repetition of it. The ‘ostensibly’ applies to the conscious  part of the
mind, and the ‘actually’ to the unconscious  part. In exactly the same
way, the ceremonial taboo of kings is ostensibly  the highest hon-
our and protection for them, while actually  it is a punishment for
their exaltation, a revenge taken on them by their subjects. Theexperiences of Sancho Panza (as described by Cervantes) whenhe was Governor of his island convinced him that this view ofcourt ceremonial was the only one that met the case. If we couldhear the views of modern kings and rulers on the subject, wemight ﬁnd that there were many others who agreed with him.
The question of why the emotional attitude towards rulers
includes such a powerful unconscious element of hostility raisesa very interesting problem, but one that lies outside the limits ofthe present study. I have already hinted at the fact that the child’scomplex of emotions towards his father—the father-complex—
has a bearing on the subject, and I may add that moretaboo and emotional ambivalence 59information on the early history of the kingship would throw a
decisive light on it. Frazer (1911 a) has put forward impressive
reasons, though, as he himself admits, not wholly conclusiveones, for supposing that the earliest kings were foreigners who,after a brief reign, were sacri ﬁced with solemn festivities as
representatives of the deity. It is possible that the course taken bythe evolution of kings may also have had an in ﬂuence upon the
myths of Christendom.
(c) The taboo upon the dead
We know that the dead are powerful rulers; but we may perhaps
be surprised when we learn that they are treated as enemies.
The taboo upon the dead is—if I may revert to the simile of
infection—specially virulent among most primitive peoples. It ismanifested, in the ﬁrst instance, in the consequences that follow
contact with the dead and in the treatment of mourners.
Among the Maoris anyone who had handled a corpse or taken
any part in its burial was in the highest degree unclean and wasalmost cut o ﬀ from intercourse with his fellow-men, or, as we
might put it, was boycotted. He could not enter any house, orcome into contact with any person or thing without infectingthem. He might not even touch food with his hands, which,owing to their uncleanness, had become quite useless. ‘Foodwould be set for him on the ground, and he would then sit orkneel down, and, with his hands carefully held behind his back,would gnaw at it as best he could. In some cases he would be fedby another person, who with outstretched arm contrived to do itwithout touching the tabooed man; but the feeder was himselfsubjected to many severe restrictions, little less onerous thanthose which were imposed upon the other. In almost everypopulous village there lived a degraded wretch, the lowest of thelow, who earned a sorry pittance by thus waiting upon thedeﬁled.’ He alone was allowed ‘to associate at arm’s length withtotem and taboo 60one who had paid the last o ﬃces . . . to the dead. And when, the
dismal term of his seclusion being over, the mourner was aboutto mix with his fellows once more, all the dishes he had used inhis seclusion were diligently smashed, and all the garments hehad worn were carefully thrown away.’ [Frazer, 1911 b, 138 f.]
The taboo observances after bodily contact with the dead are
the same over the whole of Polynesia, Melanesia and a part ofAfrica. Their most regular feature is the prohibition against thosewho have had such contact touching food themselves, and theconsequent necessity for their being fed by other people. It is aremarkable fact that in Polynesia (though the report may perhapsrefer only to Hawaii) priestly kings were subject to the samerestriction while performing their sacred functions.
1 The case of
the taboo upon the dead in Tonga o ﬀers a specially clear instance
of the way in which the degree of prohibition varies accordingto the taboo power of the person upon whom the taboo isimposed. Thus anyone who touches a dead chief is unclean forten months; but if he himself is a chief he is only tabooed forthree, four, or ﬁve months according to the rank of the dead
man; but if the dead man were the ‘great divine chief’, even thegreatest chief would be tabooed for ten months. These savagesbelieve ﬁrmly that anyone who violates the taboo ordinances is
bound to fall ill and die; indeed they believe it so ﬁrmly that, in
the opinion of an observer, ‘no native ever made an experimentto prove the contrary’.
2
Essentially the same prohibitions (though from our point of
view they are more interesting) apply to those who have been incontact with the dead only in a metaphorical sense: the deadperson’s mourning relations, widowers and widows. The obser-vances that we have so far mentioned may seem merely to givecharacteristic expression to the virulence of the taboo and its
1Frazer (loc. cit.) [quoting Ellis (1832–6, 4, 388)].
2Frazer (1911 b 140), quoting Mariner (1818 [ 1, 141]).taboo and emotional ambivalence 61contagious power. But those which now follow give us a hint at
the reasons  for the taboo—both the ostensible ones and what we
must regard as the deep-lying real ones.
‘Among the Shuswap of British Columbia widows and wid-
owers in mourning are secluded and forbidden to touch theirown head or body; the cups and cooking vessels which they usemay be used by no one else ....  N o  hunter would come near
such mourners, for their presence is unlucky. If their shadowwere to fall on anyone, he would be taken ill at once. Theyemploy thorn-bushes for bed and pillow . . . and thorn-bushesare also laid all around their beds.’
1 This last measure is
designed to keep the dead person’s ghost at a distance. The samepurpose is shown still more clearly in the usage reported fromanother North American tribe which provides that, after herhusband’s death, ‘a widow would wear a breech-cloth made ofdry bunch-grass for several days to prevent her husband’s ghosthaving intercourse with her.’
2 This suggests that contact ‘in a
metaphorical sense’ is after all understood as being bodily con-tact, for the dead man’s ghost does not leave his relations anddoes not cease to ‘hover’ round them during the time ofmourning.
‘Among the Agutainos, who inhabit Palawan, one of the
Philippine Islands, a widow may not leave her hut for seven oreight days after the death; and even then she may only go out atan hour when she is not likely to meet anybody, for whoeverlooks upon her dies a sudden death. To prevent this fatal catas-trophe, the widow knocks with a wooden peg on the trees asshe goes along, thus warning people of her dangerous proxim-ity; and the very trees on which she knocks soon die.’
3 The
nature of the danger feared from a widow such as this is made
1[Frazer (1911 b, 142), quoting Boas (1890, 643 f.).]
2[Frazer (1911 b, 143), quoting Teit (1900, 332 f.).]
3[Frazer (1911 b, 144), quoting Blumentritt (1891, 182).]totem and taboo 62plain by another example. ‘In the Mekeo district of British New
Guinea a widower loses all his civil rights and becomes a socialoutcast, an object of fear and horror, shunned by all. He may notcultivate a garden, nor show himself in public, nor walk on theroads and paths. Like a wild beast he must skulk in the long grassand the bushes; and if he sees or hears anyone coming, especiallya woman, he must hide behind a tree or a thicket.’
1 This last hint
makes it easy to trace the origin of the dangerous character ofwidowers or widows to the danger of temptation . A man who has
lost his wife must resist a desire to ﬁnd a substitute for her; a
widow must ﬁght against the same wish and is moreover liable,
being without a lord and master, to arouse the desires of othermen. Substitutive satisfactions of such a kind run counter to thesense of mourning and they would inevitably kindle the ghost’swrath.
2
One of the most puzzling, but at the same time instructive,usages in connection with mourning is the prohibition againstuttering the name of the dead person. This custom is extremelywidespread, it is expressed in a variety of ways and has hadimportant consequences. It is found not only among the Austral-ians and Polynesians (who usually show us taboo observances inthe best state of preservation), but also among ‘peoples sowidely separated from each other as the Samoyeds of Siberia andthe Todas of southern India; the Mongols of Tartary and theTuaregs of the Sahara; the Ainos of Japan and the Akamba andNandi of central Africa; the Tinguianes of the Philippines andthe inhabitants of the Nicobar Islands, of Borneo, of Madagascar,and of Tasmania.’ (Frazer, 1911 b, 353.) In some of these cases the
1[Frazer (1911 b, 144), quoting Guis (1902, 208 f.).]
2The patient whose ‘impossibilities’ I compared with taboos earlier in this
paper (see page 33) told me that whenever she met anyone dressed in mourn-ing in the street she was ﬁlled with indignation: such people, she thought,
should be forbidden to go out.taboo and emotional ambivalence
63prohibition and its consequences last only during the period of
mourning, in others they are permanent; but it seems invariablyto diminish in strictness with the passage of time.
The avoidance of the name of a dead person is as a rule
enforced with extreme severity. Thus in some South Americantribes it is regarded as a deadly insult to the survivors to mentionthe name of a dead relative in their presence, and the punish-ment for it is not less than that laid down for murder. (Ibid.,352.) It is not easy at ﬁrst to see why the mention of the name
should be regarded with such horror; but the dangers involvedhave given rise to a whole number of methods of evasion whichare interesting and important in various ways. Thus the Masai inEast Africa resort to the device of changing the dead man’s nameimmediately after his death; he may then be mentioned freelyunder his new name while all the restrictions remain attached tothe old one. This seems to presuppose that the dead man’s ghostdoes not know and will not get to know his new name. [Ibid.,354.] The Adelaide and Encounter Bay tribes of South Australiaare so consistently careful that after a death everyone bearing thesame name as the dead man’s, or a very similar one, changes itfor another. [Ibid., 355.] In some instances, as for instanceamong certain tribes in Victoria and in North-West America, thisis carried a step further, and after a death all the dead person’srelations change their names, irrespective of any similarity intheir sound. [Ibid., 357.] Indeed, among the Guaycurus in Para-guay, when a death had taken place, the chief used to change thename of every member of the tribe; and ‘from that momenteverybody remembered his new name just as if he had borne itall his life’.
1
Moreover, if the name of the dead man happens to be the
same as that of an animal or common object, some tribes think itnecessary to give these animals or objects new names, so that the
1Frazer (1911 b, 357), quoting an old Spanish observer [Lozano (1733, 70)].totem and taboo 64use of the former names shall not recall the dead man to mem-
ory. This usage leads to a perpetual change of vocabulary, whichcauses much di ﬃculty to the missionaries, especially when such
changes are permanent. In the seven years which the missionaryDobrizho ﬀer spent among the Abipones of Paraguay, ‘the native
word for jaguar was changed thrice, and the words for crocodile,thorn, and the slaughter of cattle underwent similar though lessvaried vicissitudes’.
1 The dread of uttering a dead person’s
name extends, indeed, to an avoidance of the mention of any-thing in which the dead man played a part; and an importantconsequence of this process of suppression is that these peoplespossess no tradition and no historical memory, so that anyresearch into their early history is faced by the greatest di ﬃcul-
ties. [Ibid., 362 f.] A number of these primitive races have, how-ever, adopted compensatory usages which revive the names ofdead persons after a long period of mourning by giving them tochildren, who are thus regarded as reincarnations of the dead.[Ibid., 364 f.]
This taboo upon names will seem less puzzling if we bear in
mind the fact that savages regard a name as an essential part of aman’s personality and as an important possession: they treatwords in every sense as things. As I have pointed out elsewhere[Freud, 1905 b, Chap. IV], our own children do the same. They are
never ready to accept a similarity between two words as havingno meaning; they consistently assume that if two things arecalled by similar-sounding names this must imply the existenceof some deep-lying point of agreement between them. Even acivilized adult may be able to infer from certain peculiarities inhis own behaviour that he is not so far removed as he may havethought from attributing importance to proper names, and thathis own name has become to a very remarkable extent bound upwith his personality. So, too, psycho-analytic practice comes
1Frazer (1911 b, 360), quoting Dobrizho ﬀer [1784, 2, 301].taboo and emotional ambivalence 65upon frequent con ﬁrmations of this in the evidence it ﬁnds of
the importance of names in unconscious mental activities.1
As was only to be expected, obsessional neurotics behave
exactly like savages in relation to names. Like other neurotics,they show a high degree of ‘complexive sensitiveness’
2 i n
regard to uttering or hearing particular words and names; andtheir attitude towards their own names imposes numerous, andoften serious, inhibitions upon them. One of these taboopatients of my acquaintance had adopted a rule against writingher own name, for fear that it might fall into the hands of some-one who would then be in possession of a portion of her per-sonality. She was obliged to ﬁght with convulsive loyalty against
the temptations to which her imagination subjected her, and soforbade herself ‘to surrender any part of her person’. Thisincluded in the ﬁrst place her name, and later extended to her
handwriting, till ﬁnally she gave up writing altogether.
We shall no longer feel surprised, therefore, at savages regard-
ing the name of a dead person as a portion of his personality andmaking it subject to the relevant taboo. So, too, uttering thename of a dead person is clearly a derivative of having contactwith him. We may therefore turn to the wider problem of whysuch contact is submitted to so strict a taboo.
The most obvious explanation would point to horror roused by
dead bodies and by the changes which quickly become visible inthem. Some part must also be played in the matter by mourningfor the dead person, since it must be a motive force in everythingrelating to him. But horror at the corpse clearly does not accountfor all the details of the taboo observances, and mourning can-not explain why the uttering of the dead man’s name is an insult
1Cf. Stekel [1911] and Abraham [1912].
2[Komplexemp ﬁndlichkeit —a term used by Jung in connection with his word
association experiments.]totem and taboo 66to his survivors. Mourning, on the contrary, tends to be pre-
occupied with the dead man, to dwell upon his memory and topreserve it as long as possible. Something other than mourningmust be held responsible for the peculiarities of the taboousages, something which has very di ﬀerent purposes in view. It
is precisely the taboo upon names that gives us the clue to thisunknown motive; and if the usages alone did not tell us, weshould learn it from what the mourning savages say to usthemselves.
For they make no disguise of the fact that they are afraid of the
presence or of the return of the dead person’s ghost; and theyperform a great number of ceremonies to keep him at a distanceor drive him o ﬀ.
1 They feel that to utter his name is equivalent
to invoking him and will quickly be followed by his presence.2
And accordingly they do everything they can to avoid any suchevocation. They disguise themselves so that the ghost shall notrecognize them,
3 or they change his name or their own; they
are furious with reckless strangers who by uttering the ghost’sname incite him against the survivors. It is impossible to escapethe conclusion that, in the words of Wundt (1906, 49), they arevictims to a fear of ‘the dead man’s soul which has become ademon’. Here, then, we seem to have found a con ﬁrmation of
Wundt’s view, which, as we have already seen (p. 24), considersthat the essence of taboo is a fear of demons.
This theory is based on a supposition so extraordinary that it
seems at ﬁrst sight incredible: the supposition, namely, that a
dearly loved relative at the moment of his death changes intoa demon, from whom his survivors can expect nothing but
1Frazer (1911 b 353) mentions the Tuaregs of the Sahara as an example of this
explanation being given by the savages themselves.
2Subject, perhaps, to the condition that some of his bodily remains are still in
existence. (Ibid., 372.)
3In the Nicobar Islands. (Ibid., 358.)taboo and emotional ambivalence 67hostility and against whose evil desires they must protect them-
selves by every possible means. Nevertheless, almost all theauthorities are at one in attributing these views to primitivepeoples. Westermarck, who, in my opinion, takes far too littlenotice of taboo in his book on The Origin and Development of the Moral
Ideas, actually writes in his chapter on ‘Regard for the Dead’:
‘Generally speaking, my collection of facts has led me to theconclusion that the dead are more commonly regarded asenemies than friends, and that Professor Jevons and Mr. GrantAllen are mistaken in their assertion that, according to earlybeliefs, the malevolence of the dead is for the most part directedagainst strangers only, whereas they exercise a fatherly care overthe lives and fortunes of their descendants and fellow clansmen.’
1
In an interesting volume, Rudolf Kleinpaul (1898) has used
the remnants among civilized races of the ancient belief inspirits to throw light on the relation between the living and thedead. He, too, reaches the ﬁnal conclusion that the dead, ﬁlled
with a lust for murder, sought to drag the living in their train.The dead slew; and the skeleton which we use to-day to picturethe dead stands for the fact that they themselves were slayers. Theliving did not feel safe from the attacks of the dead till there wasa sheet of water between them. That is why men liked to burythe dead on islands or on the farther side of rivers; and that, in
1Westermarck (1906–8, 2, 532 ﬀ.). In his footnotes and in the section of the
text which follows, the author gives copious con ﬁrmatory evidence, often of a
highly characteristic sort. For instance: ‘Among the Maoris the nearest andmost beloved relatives were supposed to have their natures changed by death,and to become malignant, even towards those they formerly loved. [QuotingTaylor (1870, 18).] . . . Australian natives believed that a deceased person ismalevolent for a long time after death, and the more nearly related the more heis feared. [Quoting Fraser (1892, 80).] . . . According to ideas prevalent amongthe Central Eskimo, the dead are at ﬁrst malevolent spirits who frequently roam
around the villages, causing sickness and mischief and killing men by theirtouch; but subsequently they are supposed to attain rest and are no longerfeared. [Quoting Boas (1888, 591).]’totem and taboo
68turn, is the origin of such phrases as ‘Here and in the Beyond’.
Later, the malignity of the dead diminished and was restricted tospecial categories which had a particular right to feelresentment—such as murdered men, for instance, who in theform of evil spirits went in pursuit of their murderers, or brides,who had died with their desires unsatis ﬁed. But originally, says
Kleinpaul, all of the dead were vampires, all of them had a
grudge against the living and sought to injure them and robthem of their lives. It was from corpses that the concept of evilspirits ﬁrst arose.
The hypothesis that after their death those most beloved were
transformed into demons clearly raises further questions. Whatwas it that induced primitive men to attribute such a change offeeling to those who had been dear to them? Why did they makethem into demons? Westermarck (1906–8, 2, 534 f.) is of the
opinion that these questions can be answered easily. ‘Death iscommonly regarded as the gravest of all misfortunes; hence thedead are believed to be exceedingly dissatis ﬁed with their fate.
According to primitive ideas a person only dies if he is killed—by magic if not by force—and such a death naturally tends tomake the soul revengeful and ill-tempered. It is envious of theliving and is longing for the company of its old friends; nowonder, then, that it sends them diseases to cause theird e a t h ....  But the notion that the disembodied soul is on the
whole a malicious being . . . is also, no doubt, intimately con-nected with the instinctive fear of the dead, which is in its turnthe outcome of the fear of death.’
The study of psycho-neurotic disorders suggests a more com-
prehensive explanation, which at the same time covers that putforward by Westermarck.
When a wife has lost her husband or a daughter her mother, it
not infrequently happens that the survivor is overwhelmed bytormenting doubts (to which we give the name of ‘obsessivetaboo and emotional ambivalence 69self-reproaches’) as to whether she may not herself have been
responsible for the death of this cherished being through someact of carelessness or neglect. No amount of recollection of thecare she lavished on the su ﬀerer, no amount of objective dis-
proof of the accusation, serves to bring the torment to an end. Itmay be regarded as a pathological form of mourning, and withthe passage of time it gradually dies away. The psycho-analyticinvestigation of such cases has revealed the secret motives of thedisorder. We ﬁnd that in a certain sense these obsessive self-
reproaches are justi ﬁed, and that this is why they are proof
against contradictions and protests. It is not that the mournerwas really responsible for the death or was really guilty of neg-lect, as the self-reproaches declare to be the case. None the lessthere was something in her—a wish that was unconscious toherself—which would not have been dissatis ﬁed by the occur-
rence of death and which might actually have brought it about ifit had had the power. And after death has occurred, it is against
this unconscious wish that the reproaches are a reaction. Inalmost every case where there is an intense emotional attach-ment to a particular person we ﬁnd that behind the tender love
there is a concealed hostility in the unconscious. This is theclassical example, the prototype, of the ambivalence of humanemotions. This ambivalence is present to a greater or less amountin the innate disposition of everyone; normally, there is not somuch of it as to produce the obsessive self-reproaches we areconsidering. Where, however, it is copiously present in the dis-position, it will manifest itself precisely in the subject’s relationto those of whom he is most fond, in the place, in fact, whereone would least expect to ﬁnd it. It must be supposed that the
presence of a particularly large amount of this originalemotional ambivalence is characteristic of the disposition ofobsessional neurotics—whom I have so often brought up forcomparison in this discussion upon taboo.
We have now discovered a motive which can explain the ideatotem and taboo 70that the souls of those who have just died are transformed into
demons and the necessity felt by survivors to protect themselvesby taboos against their hostility. Let us suppose that the emo-tional life of primitive peoples is characterized by an amount ofambivalence as great as that which we are led by the ﬁndings of
psycho-analysis to attribute to obsessional patients. It thenbecomes easy to understand how after a painful bereavementsavages should be obliged to produce a reaction against the hos-tility latent in their unconscious similar to that expressed asobsessive self-reproach in the case of neurotics. But this hostility,distressingly felt in the unconscious as satisfaction over thedeath, is di ﬀerently dealt with among primitive peoples. The
defence against it takes the form of displacing it on to the objectof the hostility, on to the dead themselves. This defensive pro-cedure, which is a common one both in normal and in patho-logical mental life, is known as a ‘projection’ . The survivor thus
denies that he has ever harboured any hostile feelings against thedead loved one; the soul of the dead harbours them instead andseeks to put them into action during the whole period ofmourning. In spite of the successful defence which the survivorachieves by means of projection, his emotional reaction showsthe characteristics of punishment and remorse, for he is thesubject of fears and submits to renunciations and restrictions,though these are in part disguised as measures of protectionagainst the hostile demon. Once again, therefore, we ﬁnd that
the taboo has grown up on the basis of an ambivalent emotionalattitude. The taboo upon the dead arises, like the others, fromthe contrast between conscious pain and unconscious satisfac-tion over the death that has occurred. Since such is the origin ofthe ghost’s resentment, it follows naturally that the survivorswho have the most to fear will be those who were formerly itsnearest and dearest.
In this respect taboo observances, like neurotic symptoms,
have a double sense. On the one hand, in their restrictivetaboo and emotional ambivalence 71character, they are expressions of mourning; but on the other
hand they clearly betray—what they seek to conceal—hostilityagainst the dead disguised as self-defence. We have alreadylearned that certain taboos arise out of fear of temptation. Thefact that a dead man is helpless is bound to act as an encourage-ment to the survivor to give free rein to his hostile passions, andthat temptation must be countered by a prohibition.
Westermarck is right in insisting that savages draw no distinc-
tion between violent and natural death. In the view ofunconscious thinking, a man who has died a natural death is amurdered man: evil wishes have killed him.
1 Anyone who
investigates the origin and signi ﬁcance of dreams of the death of
loved relatives (of parents or brothers or sisters) will be able toconvince himself that dreamers, children and savages are at onein their attitude towards the dead—an attitude based uponemotional ambivalence.
2
At the beginning of this essay [p. 24] disagreement was
expressed with Wundt’s opinion that the essence of taboo was afear of demons. Yet we have now assented to an explanation thatderives the taboo upon the dead from a fear of the soul of thedead person transformed into a demon. The apparent contra-diction can easily be resolved. It is true that we have acceptedthe presence of demons, but not as something ultimate andpsychologically unanalysable. We have succeeded, as it were, ingetting behind the demons, for we have explained them asprojections of hostile feelings harboured by the survivorsagainst the dead.
Both of the two sets of feelings (the a ﬀectionate and the hos-
tile), which, as we have good reason to believe, exist towards thedead person, seek to take e ﬀect at the time of the bereavement, as
mourning and as satisfaction. There is bound to be a con ﬂict
1Cf. the next essay in this volume.
2[Cf. Freud: The Interpretation of Dreams  (1900), English translation, 1932, 242 ﬀ.]totem and taboo 72between these two contrary feelings; and, since one of the two,
the hostility, is wholly or for the greater part unconscious, theoutcome of the con ﬂict cannot be to subtract, as it were, the
feeling with the lesser intensity from that with the greater andto establish the remainder in consciousness—as occurs, forinstance, when one forgives a slight that one has received fromsomeone of whom one is fond. The process is dealt withinstead by the special psychical mechanism known in psycho-analysis, as I have said, by the name of ‘projection’. The hostil-ity, of which the survivors know nothing and moreover wish toknow nothing, is ejected from internal perception into theexternal world, and thus detached from them and pushed on tosomeone else. It is no longer true that they are rejoicing to berid of the dead man; on the contrary, they are mourning forhim; but, strange to say, he has turned into a wicked demon
ready to gloat over their misfortunes and eager to kill them. Itthen becomes necessary for them, the survivors, to defendthemselves against this evil enemy; they are relieved of pressurefrom within, but have only exchanged it for oppression fromwithout.
It cannot be disputed that this process of projection, which
turns a dead man into a malignant enemy, is able to ﬁnd support
in any real acts of hostility on his part that may be recollectedand felt as a grudge against him: his severity, his love of power,his unfairness, or whatever else may form the background ofeven the tenderest of human relationships. But it cannot be sucha simple matter as that. This factor alone cannot explain thecreation of demons by projection. The faults of the dead nodoubt provide a part of the explanation of the survivors’ hostil-ity; but they would not operate in this way unless the survivorshad ﬁrst developed hostility on their own account. The moment
of death, moreover, would certainly seem to be a mostinappropriate occasion for recalling any justi ﬁable grounds of
complaint that might exist. It is impossible to escape the fact thattaboo and emotional ambivalence 73the true determining factor is invariably unconscious  hostility. A
hostile current of feeling such as this against a person’s nearestand dearest relatives may remain latent during their lifetime, thatis, its existence may not be betrayed to consciousness eitherdirectly or through some substitute. But when they die this is nolonger possible and the con ﬂict becomes acute. The mourning
which derives from an intensi ﬁcation of the a ﬀectionate feelings
becomes on the one hand more impatient of the latent hostilityand, on the other hand, will not allow it to give rise to any senseof satisfaction. Accordingly, there follow the repression of theunconscious hostility by the method of projection and the con-struction of the ceremonial which gives expression to the fear ofbeing punished by the demons. When in course of time themourning runs its course, the con ﬂict grows less acute, so that
the taboo upon the dead is able to diminish in severity or sinkinto oblivion.
(4)
Having thus explained the basis of the exceedingly instructive
taboo upon the dead, we must not omit to add a few remarksthat may help to increase our understanding of taboo ingeneral.
The projection of unconscious hostility on to demons in the
case of the taboo upon the dead is only a single instance of anumber of processes to which the greatest in ﬂuence must be
attributed in the shaping of the primitive mind. In the case wehave been dealing with, projection served the purpose of dealingwith an emotional con ﬂict; and it is employed in the same way
in a large number of psychical situations that lead to neuroses.But projection was not created for the purpose of defence; it alsooccurs where there is no con ﬂict. The projection outwards of
internal perceptions is a primitive mechanism, to which, forinstance, our sense perceptions are subject, and which thereforetotem and taboo 74normally plays a very large part in determining the form taken
by our external world. Under conditions whose nature has notyet been su ﬃciently established, internal perceptions of
emotional and intellective processes can be projected outwardsin the same way as sense perceptions; they are thus employed forbuilding up the external world, though they should by rightsremain part of the internal  world. This may have some genetic
connection with the fact that the function of attention was ori-ginally directed not towards the internal world but towards thestimuli that stream in from the external world, and that thatfunction’s only information upon endopsychic processes wasreceived from feelings of pleasure and unpleasure. It was notuntil a language of abstract thought had been developed, that isto say, not until the sensory residues of verbal presentations hadbeen linked to the internal processes, that the latter themselvesgradually became capable of being perceived. Before that, owingto the projection outwards of internal perceptions, primitivemen arrived at a picture of the external world which we, withour intensi ﬁed conscious perception, have now to translate back
into psychology.
The projection of their own evil impulses into demons is only
one portion of a system which constituted the Weltanschauung
[view of the universe] of primitive peoples, and which we shallcome to know as ‘animism’ in the following essay. There weshall have to investigate that system’s psychological character-istics, and we shall do so once again by reference to the similarsystems which we ﬁnd constructed by neurotics. For the
moment I will only say that the prototype of all such systems iswhat we have termed the ‘secondary revision’ of the content of
dreams.
1 And we must not forget that, at and after the stage at
which systems are constructed, two sets of reasons can beassigned for every psychical event that is consciously judged—
1[Cf. Freud: The Interpretation of Dreams  (1900), English translation, 1932, 451 ﬀ.]taboo and emotional ambivalence 75one set belonging to the system and the other set real but
unconscious.1
Wundt (1906, 129) remarks that ‘among the activities attrib-
uted by myths all over the world to demons, the harmful pre-dominate, so that in popular belief bad demons are clearly olderthan good ones’. It is quite possible that the whole concept ofdemons was derived from the important relation of the living tothe dead. The ambivalence inherent in that relation wasexpressed in the subsequent course of human development bythe fact that, from the same root, it gave rise to two completelyopposed psychical structures: on the one hand fear of demonsand ghosts and on the other hand veneration of ancestors.
2 The
fact that demons are always regarded as the spirits of those whohave died recently  shows better than anything the in ﬂuence of
mourning on the origin of the belief in demons. Mourning has aquite speci ﬁc psychical task to perform: its function is to detach
the survivors’ memories and hopes from the dead. When thishas been achieved, the pain grows less and with it the remorseand self-reproaches and consequently the fear of the demon aswell. And the same spirits who to begin with were feared asdemons may now expect to meet with friendlier treatment, theyare revered as ancestors and appeals are made to them for help.
If we follow the changing relations between survivors and the
1[Further explained below, p. 94 f.] The projected creations of primitive men
resemble the personi ﬁcations constructed by creative writers; for the latter
externalize in the form of separate individuals the opposing instinctualimpulses struggling within them.
2In the course of psycho-analyses of neurotics who su ﬀer (or who su ﬀered in
their childhood) from fear of ghosts, it is often possible to show without muchdiﬃculty that the ghosts are disguises for the patient’s parents. Cf. in this
connection a paper upon ‘Sexual Ghosts’ by Haeberlin (1912). Here the person
concerned was not the subject’s parent (who was dead) but someone else oferotic signi ﬁcance to him.totem and taboo
76dead through the course of ages, it becomes obvious that there
has been an extraordinary diminution in ambivalence. It is nowquite easy to keep down the unconscious hostility to the dead(though its existence can still be traced) without any particularexpenditure of psychical energy. Where, in earlier times, satis-ﬁed hatred and pained a ﬀection fought each other, we now ﬁnd
that a kind of scar has been formed in the shape of piety, whichdeclares ‘ de mortuis nil nisi bonum ’. It is only neurotics whose
mourning for the loss of those dear to them is still troubled byobsessive self-reproaches—the secret of which is revealed bypsycho-analysis as the old emotional ambivalence. We need notdiscuss here how this alteration came about or how much sharein it is due to a constitutional modi ﬁcation and how much to a
real improvement in family relations. But this example suggeststhe probability that the psychical impulses of primitive peopleswere characterized by a higher amount of ambivalence than is tobe found in modern civilized man. It is to be supposed that asthis ambivalence diminished, taboo (a symptom of the ambiva-lence and a compromise between the two con ﬂicting impulses)
slowly disappeared.
1 Neurotics, who are obliged to reproduce
the struggle and the taboo resulting from it, may be said to haveinherited an archaic constitution as an atavistic vestige; the needto compensate for this at the behest of civilization is what drivesthem to their immense expenditure of mental energy.
And here we may recall the obscure and puzzling statement by
Wundt on the double meaning of the word taboo: ‘sacred’ and‘unclean’. (See above [p. 30].) Originally, according to him, theword did not possess these two meanings, but described ‘what isdemonic’, ‘what may not be touched’, thus stressing an import-ant characteristic common to both the extreme concepts. Thepersistence, however (he added), of this common characteristicwas evidence that the ground covered by the two—the sacred
1[The last two sentences are in spaced type in the original.]taboo and emotional ambivalence 77and the unclean—was originally one and did not become
diﬀerentiated until later.
Our discussions, on the contrary, lead us to the simple con-
clusion that the word ‘taboo’ had a double meaning from thevery ﬁrst and that it was used to designate a particular kind of
ambivalence and whatever arose from it. ‘Taboo’ is itself anambivalent word; and one feels on looking back that the well-attested meaning of the word should alone have made it possibleto infer—what has actually been arrived at as a result of exten-sive researches—that the prohibitions of taboo are to be under-stood as consequences of an emotional ambivalence. Study ofthe earliest languages has taught us that there were once manysuch words, which expressed contrary ideas and in a sense(though not in quite the same sense as the word ‘taboo’) wereambivalent.
1 Slight modi ﬁcations in the pronunciation of the
antithetical ‘primal word’ made it possible subsequently to give
separate verbal expression to the two contrary ideas which wereoriginally combined in it.
The word ‘taboo’ met with a di ﬀerent fate. As the importance
of the ambivalence denoted by it diminished, the word itself, orrather the words analogous to it, fell out of use. I hope to be able,in a later connection, to make it probable that a de ﬁnite histor-
ical chain of events is concealed behind the fate of this concept:that the word was at ﬁrst attached to certain quite speci ﬁc
human relations which were characterized by great emotionalambivalence, and that its use then spread on to other analogousrelations.
If I am not mistaken, the explanation of taboo also throws light
on the nature and origin of conscience . It is possible, without any
stretching of the sense of the terms, to speak of a taboo con-science or, after a taboo has been violated, of a taboo sense of
1Cf. my review of Abel’s ‘Antithetical Sense of Primal Words’ [Freud, 1910].totem and taboo 78guilt. Taboo conscience is probably the earliest form in which
the phenomenon of conscience is met with.
For what is ‘conscience’? On the evidence of language it is
related to that of which one is ‘most certainly conscious’.Indeed, in some languages the words for ‘conscience’ and ‘con-
scious’ can scarcely be distinguished.
1
Conscience is the internal perception of the rejection of a
particular wish operating within us. The stress, however, is uponthe fact that this rejection has no need to appeal to anything elsefor support, that it is quite ‘certain of itself’. This is even clearerin the case of consciousness of guilt—the perception of theinternal condemnation of an act by which we have carried out aparticular wish. To put forward any reason for this would seemsuper ﬂuous: anyone who has a conscience must feel within him
the justi ﬁcation for the condemnation, must feel the self-
reproach for the act that has been carried out. This same charac-teristic is to be seen in the savage’s attitude towards taboo. It is acommand issued by conscience; any violation of it produces afearful sense of guilt which follows as a matter of course and ofwhich the origin is unknown.
2
Thus it seems probable that conscience too arose, on a basis of
emotional ambivalence, from quite speci ﬁc human relations to
which this ambivalence was attached; and that it arose under theconditions which we have shown to apply in the case of taboo
1[E.g. the French ‘ conscience ’, which has both meanings. The German word for
‘conscience’ is ‘ Gewissen ’, which contains the same root as such words as ‘ wissen ’,
‘to know’, and ‘ bewusst ’, ‘conscious’, as well as the word actually used for
comparison in this paragraph and the next, ‘ gewiss’, ‘certain’ or ‘know with
certainty’.]
2The sense of guilt in the case of taboos is not in the least diminished if the
violation occurs unwittingly. (Cf. the instances above [p. 42 f.].) An interestingparallel is found in Greek mythology: the guilt of Œdipus was not palliated bythe fact that he incurred it without his knowledge and even against hisintention.taboo and emotional ambivalence
79and of obsessional neurosis—namely, that one of the opposing
feelings involved shall be unconscious and kept under repressionby the compulsive domination of the other one. This conclusionis supported by several things we have learnt from the analysis ofneuroses.
In the ﬁrst place, we have found that a feature in the character
of obsessional neurotics is a scrupulous conscientiousness whichis a symptom reacting against the temptation lurking in theirunconscious. If their illness becomes more acute, they develop asense of guilt of the most intense degree. In fact, one may ven-ture to say that if we cannot trace the origin of the sense of guiltin obsessional neurotics, there can be no hope of our ever tracing
it. This task can be directly achieved in the case of individualneurotic patients, and we may rely upon reaching a similarsolution by inference in the case of primitive peoples.
In the second place, we cannot help being struck by the fact
that a sense of guilt has about it much of the nature of anxiety:we could describe it without any misgivings as ‘dread of con-science’. But the anxiety points to unconscious sources. Thepsychology of the neuroses has taught us that, if wishfulimpulses are repressed, their libido is transformed into anxiety.And this reminds us that there is something unknown andunconscious in connection with the sense of guilt, namely thereasons for the act of repudiation. The character of anxiety that isinherent in the sense of guilt corresponds to this unknownfactor.
1
Since taboos are mainly expressed in prohibitions, the under-
lying presence of a positive  current of desire may occur to us as
something quite obvious and calling for no lengthy proofs basedon the analogy of the neuroses. For, after all, there is no need to
1[It is to be remarked that Freud’s views on the origin and nature both of
conscience and of anxiety were greatly modi ﬁed in his later writings. For these
later views see Lectures 31 and 32 in his New Introductory Lectures (1933).]totem and taboo 80prohibit something that no one desires to do, and a thing that is
forbidden with the greatest emphasis must be a thing that isdesired. If we were to apply this plausible thesis to our primitivepeoples, we should be led to the conclusion that some of theirstrongest temptations were to kill their kings and priests, tocommit incest, to maltreat the dead, and so on—which seemsscarcely probable. And we should be met with the most positivecontradiction if we were to apply the same thesis to instances inwhich we ourselves seem most clearly to hear the voice of con-science. We should maintain with the most absolute certaintythat we feel not the slightest temptation to violate any of theseprohibitions—the commandment to ‘do no murder’, for
instance—and that we feel nothing but horror at the notion ofviolating them.
If, however, we were to admit the claims thus asserted by our
conscience, it would follow, on the one hand, that these prohib-itions would be super ﬂuous—both taboo and our own moral
prohibitions—and, on the other hand, the fact of consciencewould remain unexplained and no place would be left for therelations between conscience, taboo and neurosis. In otherwords, we should be back in the state of knowledge we were inbefore we approached the problem from the psycho-analyticangle.
Suppose, on the other hand, that we were to take into account
the ﬁnding arrived at by psycho-analysis from the dreams of
normal people, to the e ﬀect that we ourselves are subject, more
strongly and more often than we suspect, to a temptation to killsomeone and that that temptation produces psychical e ﬀects
even though it remains out of sight of our consciousness.Suppose, again, that we were to recognize the compulsive obser-vances of certain neurotics as being guarantees against an inten-siﬁed impulse to murder or as being self-punishments on
account of it. In that case we should have to attach still greaterimportance to our thesis that where there is a prohibition theretaboo and emotional ambivalence 81must be an underlying desire. We should have to suppose that
the desire to murder is actually present in the unconscious andthat neither taboos nor moral prohibitions are psychologicallysuper ﬂuous but that on the contrary they are explained and
justiﬁed by the existence of an ambivalent attitude towards the
impulse to murder.
One of the characteristics of this ambivalent relation which I
have repeatedly stressed as fundamental—the fact that the posi-tive current of desire is an unconscious one—opens the way tofurther considerations and to further possible explanations.Psychical processes in the unconscious are not in every respectidentical with those with which our conscious mind is familiar;they enjoy some remarkable liberties that are forbidden to thelatter. An unconscious impulse need not have arisen at the pointwhere it makes its appearance; it may arise from some quiteother region and have applied originally to quite other personsand connections; it may have reached the place at which itattracts our attention through the mechanism of ‘displacement’.Owing, moreover, to the indestructibility and insusceptibility tocorrection which are attributes of unconscious processes, it mayhave survived from very early times to which it was appropriateinto later times and circumstances in which its manifestationsare bound to seem strange. These are no more than hints, but ifthey were attentively developed their importance for our under-standing of the growth of civilization would become apparent.
Before I conclude this discussion, a further point must not be
overlooked which will pave the way for later inquiries. In main-taining the essential similarity between taboo prohibitions andmoral prohibitions, I have not sought to dispute the fact thatthere must be a psychological di ﬀerence between them. The
only possible reason why the prohibitions no longer take theform of taboos must be some change in the circumstancesgoverning the ambivalence underlying them.totem and taboo 82In our analytical examination of the problems of taboo we
have hitherto allowed ourselves to be led by the points of agree-ment that we have been able to show between it and obsessionalneurosis. But after all taboo is not a neurosis but a social institu-tion. We are therefore faced with the task of explaining whatdiﬀerence there is in principle between a neurosis and a cultural
creation such as taboo.
Once again I will take a single fact as my starting-point. It is
feared among primitive peoples that the violation of a taboo willbe followed by a punishment, as a rule by some serious illness orby death. The punishment threatens to fall on whoever wasresponsible for violating the taboo. In obsessional neuroses thecase is di ﬀerent. What the patient fears if he performs some
forbidden action is that a punishment will fall not on himself buton someone else. This person’s identity is as a rule left unstated,but can usually be shown without di ﬃculty by analysis to be one
of those closest and most dear to the patient. Here, then, theneurotic seems to be behaving altruistically and the primitiveman egoistically. Only if the violation of a taboo is not auto-matically avenged upon the wrong-doer does a collective feelingarise among savages that they are all threatened by the outrage;and they thereupon hasten to carry out the omitted punishmentthemselves. There is no di ﬃculty in explaining the mechanism
of this solidarity. What is in question is fear of an infectiousexample, of the temptation to imitate—that is, of the contagiouscharacter of taboo. If one person succeeds in gratifying therepressed desire, the same desire is bound to be kindled in all theother members of the community. In order to keep the tempta-tion down, the envied transgressor must be deprived of the fruitof his enterprise; and the punishment will not infrequently givethose who carry it out an opportunity of committing the sameoutrage under colour of an act of expiation. This is indeed one ofthe foundations of the human penal system and it is based, nodoubt correctly, on the assumption that the prohibited impulsestaboo and emotional ambivalence 83are present alike in the criminal and in the avenging community.
In this, psycho-analysis is no more than con ﬁrming the habitual
pronouncement of the pious: we are all miserable sinners.
How, then, are we to account for the unexpected nobility of
mind of the neurotic, who fears nothing on his own account buteverything for someone he loves? Analytical inquiry shows thatthis attitude is not primary. Originally, that is to say at thebeginning of the illness, the threat of punishment applied, as inthe case of savages, to the patient himself; he was invariably infear for his own life; it was not until later that the mortal fear wasdisplaced on to another and a loved person. The process is a littlecomplicated, but we can follow it perfectly. At the root of theprohibition there is invariably a hostile impulse against someonethe patient loves—a wish that that person should die. Thisimpulse is repressed by a prohibition and the prohibition isattached to some particular act, which, by displacement, repre-sents, it may be, a hostile act against the loved person. There is athreat of death if this act is performed. But the process goesfurther, and the original wish that the loved person may die is
replaced by a fear that he may die. So that when the neurosis
appears to be so tenderly altruistic, it is merely compensating  for an
underlying contrary attitude of brutal egoism. We may describeas ‘social’ the emotions which are determined by showingconsideration for another person without taking him as a[direct] sexual object. The receding into the background ofthese social factors may be stressed as a fundamental character-istic of the neurosis, though one which is later disguisedby overcompensation.
I do not propose to linger over the origin of these social
impulses and their relation to the other basic human instinctsbut shall proceed to illustrate the second main characteristic ofthe neurosis by means of another example. In the forms which itassumes, taboo very closely resembles the neurotic’s fear oftouching, his ‘touching phobia’. Now, in the case of the neurosistotem and taboo 84the prohibition invariably relates to touching of a sexual kind, and
psycho-analysis has shown that it is in general true that theinstinctual forces that are diverted and displaced in neuroseshave a sexual origin. In the case of taboo the prohibited touchingis obviously not to be understood in an exclusively sexual sensebut in the more general sense of attacking, of getting control,and of asserting oneself. If there is a prohibition against touchinga chief or anything that has been in contact with him, this meansthat an inhibition is to be laid on the same impulse whichexpresses itself on other occasions in keeping a suspicious watchupon the chief or even in ill-treating him physically before hiscoronation. (See above [p. 58].) Thus the fact which is character-istic of the neurosis is the preponderance of the sexual over thesocial instinctual elements.
1 The social instincts, however, are
themselves derived from a combination of egoistic and eroticcomponents into wholes of a special kind.
This single comparison between taboo and obsessional neur-
osis is enough to enable us to gather the nature of the relationbetween the di ﬀerent forms of neurosis and cultural institutions,
and to see how it is that the study of the psychology of theneuroses is important for an understanding of the growth ofcivilization.
The neuroses exhibit on the one hand striking and far-reaching
points of agreement with those great social institutions, art,religion and philosophy. But on the other hand they seem likedistortions of them. It might be maintained that a case of hys-teria is a caricature of a work of art, that an obsessional neurosisis a caricature of a religion and that a paranoic delusion is acaricature of a philosophical system. The divergence resolvesitself ultimately into the fact that the neuroses are social struc-tures; they endeavour to achieve by private means what iseﬀected in society by collective e ﬀort. If we analyse the instincts
1[This sentence is in spaced type in the original.]taboo and emotional ambivalence 85at work in the neuroses, we ﬁnd that the determining in ﬂuence
in them is exercised by instinctual forces of sexual origin; thecorresponding cultural formations, on the other hand, are basedupon social instincts, originating from the combination of ego-istic and erotic elements. Sexual needs are not capable of unitingmen in the same way as are the demands of self-preservation.Sexual satisfaction is essentially the private a ﬀair of each
individual.
The asocial nature of neuroses has its genetic origin in their
most fundamental purpose, which is to take ﬂight from an
unsatisfying reality into a more pleasurable world of phantasy.The real world, which is avoided in this way by neurotics, isunder the sway of human society and of the institutions collec-tively created by it. To turn away from reality is at the same timeto withdraw from the community of man.totem and taboo 863
ANIMISM, MAGIC AND
THE OMNIPOTENCE
OF THOUGHTS
(1)
Writings that seek to apply the ﬁndings of psycho-analysis to
topics in the ﬁeld of the mental sciences have the inevitable
defect of o ﬀering too little to readers of both classes. Such writ-
ings can only be in the nature of an instigation: they put beforethe specialist certain suggestions for him to take into account inhis own work. This defect is bound to be extremely evident in anessay which will attempt to deal with the immense domain ofwhat is known as ‘ animism ’.
1
Animism is, in its narrower sense, the doctrine of souls, and,
1The necessity for a concise treatment of the material involves the omission of
any elaborate bibliography. Instead, I will merely refer to the standard works ofHerbert Spencer, J. G. Frazer, Andrew Lang, E. B. Tylor and Wilhelm Wundt,from which all that I have to say about animism and magic is derived. My owncontribution is visible only in my selection both of material and of opinions.in its wider sense, the doctrine of spiritual beings in general. The
term ‘animatism’ has also been used to denote the theory of theliving character of what appear to us to be inanimate objects [seebelow, p. 107], and the terms ‘animalism’ and ‘manism’ occur aswell in this connection. The word ‘animism’, originally used todescribe a particular philosophical system, seems to have beengiven its present meaning by Tylor.
1
What led to the introduction of these terms was a realization
of the highly remarkable view of nature and the universeadopted by the primitive races of whom we have knowledge,whether in past history or at the present time. They people theworld with innumerable spiritual beings both benevolent andmalignant; and these spirits and demons they regard as thecauses of natural phenomena and they believe that not only ani-mals and plants but all the inanimate objects in the world areanimated by them. A third, and perhaps the most important,article of this primitive ‘philosophy of nature’
2 strikes us as less
strange, since, while we have retained only a very limited beliefin the existence of spirits and explain natural phenomena by theagency of impersonal physical forces, we ourselves are not veryfar removed from this third belief. For primitive peoples believethat human individuals are inhabited by similar spirits. Thesesouls which live in human beings can leave their habitations andmigrate into other human beings; they are the vehicle of mentalactivities and are to a certain extent independent of their bodies.Originally souls were pictured as very similar to persons andonly in the course of a long development have they lost theirmaterial characteristics and become to a high degree‘spiritualized’.
3
1Cf. Tylor (1891, 1, 425), Wundt (1906 [142 f. and] 173) [and Marett
(1900, 171)].
2[‘Naturphilosophie ’, the pantheistic philosophy of Schelling.]
3Wundt (1906), Chapter IV , ‘Die Seelenvorstellungen’.totem and taboo 88Most authorities incline to the view that these ideas of a soul
are the original nucleus of the animistic system, that spirits areonly souls that have made themselves independent, and that thesouls of animals, plants and objects were constructed on theanalogy of human souls.
How did primitive men arrive at the peculiar dualistic views
on which the animistic system is based? It is supposed that theydid so by observing the phenomena of sleep (including dreams)and of death which so much resembles it, and by attempting toexplain those states, which are of such close concern to every-one. The chief starting-point of this theorizing must have beenthe problem of death. What primitive man regarded as the nat-ural thing was the inde ﬁnite prolongation of life—immortality.
The idea of death was only accepted late, and with hesitancy.Even for us it is lacking in content and has no clear connotation.There have been very lively but inconclusive discussions uponthe part that may have been played in the formation of the basicdoctrines of animism by such other observed or experiencedfacts as dream-pictures, shadows, mirror images, and so on.
1
It has been regarded as perfectly natural and not in the least
puzzling that primitive man should have reacted to the phenom-ena which aroused his speculations by forming the idea of thesoul and then of extending it to objects in the external world. Indiscussing the fact that the same animistic ideas have emergedamong the most various races and at every period, Wundt(1906, 154) declares that ‘they are the necessary psychologicalproduct of a mythopœic consciousness . . . and in this sense,therefore, primitive animism must be regarded as the spiritualexpression of the natural state of man, so far as it is accessible toour observation’. The justi ﬁcation for attributing life to
inanimate objects was already stated by Hume in his Natural
1Cf. Wundt [loc. cit.], Herbert Spencer [1893, Part I], as well as the general
articles in the Encyclopaedia Britannica  (1910–11) on ‘Animism’, ‘Mythology’, etc.animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 89History of Religion  [Section III]: ‘There is an universal tendency
among mankind to conceive all beings like themselves, and totransfer to every object those qualities with which they are famil-iarly acquainted, and of which they are intimately conscious.’
1
Animism is a system of thought. It does not merely give an
explanation of a particular phenomenon, but allows us to graspthe whole universe as a single unity from a single point of view.The human race, if we are to follow the authorities, have in thecourse of ages developed three such systems of thought—threegreat pictures of the universe: animistic (or mythological),religious and scienti ﬁc. Of these, animism, the ﬁrst to be created,
is perhaps the one which is most consistent and exhaustive andwhich gives a truly complete explanation of the nature of theuniverse. This ﬁrst human Weltanschauung  is a psychological  theory. It
would go beyond our present purpose to show how much of itstill persists in modern life, either in the debased form of super-stition or as the living basis of our speech, our beliefs and ourphilosophies.
With these three stages in mind, it may be said that animism
itself is not yet a religion but contains the foundations on whichreligions are later built. It is obvious, too, that myths are basedon animistic premises, though the details of the relation betweenmyths and animism seem to be unexplained in some essentialrespects.
(2)
Our psycho-analytic approach to the subject, however, is from
another side. It is not to be supposed that men were inspired tocreate their ﬁrst system of the universe by pure speculative curi-
osity. The practical need for controlling the world around themmust have played its part. So we are not surprised to learn that,
1Quoted by Tylor (1891, 1, 477).totem and taboo 90hand in hand with the animistic system, there went a body of
instructions upon how to obtain mastery over men, beasts andthings—or rather, over their spirits. These instructions go by thenames of ‘sorcery’ and ‘magic’.
1 Reinach (1905–12, 2, xv)
describes them as the ‘strategy of animism’; I should prefer,following Hubert and Mauss (1904 [142 ﬀ.]), to regard them as
its technique.
Can the concepts of sorcery and magic be distinguished?
Perhaps—if we are prepared to show a somewhat arbitrary dis-regard for the ﬂuctuations of linguistic usage. Sorcery, then, is
essentially the art of in ﬂuencing spirits by treating them in the
same way as one would treat men in like circumstances: appeas-ing them, making amends to them, propitiating them, intimidat-ing them, robbing them of their power, subduing them to one’swill—by the same methods that have proved e ﬀective with
living men. Magic, on the other hand, is something di ﬀerent:
fundamentally, it disregards spirits and makes use of special pro-cedures and not of everyday psychological methods. It is easy toguess that magic is the earlier and more important branch ofanimistic technique; for magical methods can, among others, beused in dealing with spirits,
2 and magic can be applied as well in
cases where, as it seems to us, the process of spiritualizingNature has not yet been carried out.
Magic has to serve the most varied purposes—it must subject
natural phenomena to the will of man, it must protect theindividual from his enemies and from dangers and it must givehim power to injure his enemies. But the principle on thepresumption of which magical action is based—or, moreproperly, the principle of magic—is so striking that none of the
1[’Zauberei ’ and ‘ Magie’ in the original.]
2If a spirit is scared away by making a noise and shouting, the action is one
purely of sorcery; if compulsion is applied to it by getting hold of its name,magic has been used against it.animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts
91authorities has failed to recognize it. Tylor [1891, 1, 116], if
we leave on one side an accompanying moral judgment, statesit in its most succinct form as mistaking an ideal connection fora real one. I will illustrate this feature from two groups ofmagical acts.
One of the most widespread magical procedures for injuring
an enemy is by making an e ﬃgy of him from any convenient
material. Whether the e ﬃgy resembles him is of little account:
any object can be ‘made into’ an e ﬃgy of him. Whatever is
then done to the e ﬃgy, the same thing happens to the
detested original; whatever part of the former’s body is dam-aged, the same part of the latter’s becomes diseased. The samemagical technique may be employed, not only for purposes ofprivate enmity, but also for pious ends and for giving help togods against malignant demons. I will quote from Frazer(1911 a, 1, 67): ‘Every night when the sun-god Ra sank down
to his home in the glowing west he was assailed by hosts ofdemons under the leadership of the arch- ﬁend Apepi. All night
long he fought them, and sometimes by day the powers ofdarkness sent up clouds even into the blue Egyptian sky toobscure his light and weaken his power. To aid the sun-god inthis daily struggle, a ceremony was daily performed in histemple at Thebes. A ﬁgure of his foe Apepi, represented as a
crocodile with a hideous face or a serpent with many coils,was made of wax, and on it the demon’s name was written ingreen ink. Wrapt in a papyrus case, on which another likenessof Apepi had been drawn in green ink, the ﬁgure was then
tied up with black hair, spat upon, hacked with a stone knife,and cast on the ground. There the priest trod on it with hisleft foot again and again, and then burnt it in a ﬁre made of a
certain plant or grass. When Apepi himself had thus beeneﬀectually disposed of, waxen e ﬃgies of each of his principal
demons, and of their fathers, mothers and children, weretotem and taboo 92made and burnt in the same way. The service, accompanied by
the recitation of certain prescribed spells, was repeated notmerely morning, noon and night, but whenever a storm wasraging, or heavy rain had set in, or black clouds were stealingacross the sky to hide the sun’s bright disc. The ﬁends of
darkness, clouds, and rain felt the injuries in ﬂicted on their
images as if they had been done to themselves; they passedaway, at least for a time, and the bene ﬁcent sun-god shone out
triumphant once more.’
1
From the vast number of magical acts having a similar basis I
will only draw attention to two more, which have played a largepart among primitive peoples of every age and which persist tosome degree in the myths and cults of higher stages ofcivilization—that is, rituals for producing rain and fertility. Rainis produced magically by imitating it or the clouds and stormswhich give rise to it, by ‘playing at rain’, one might almost say.
In Japan, for instance, ‘a party of Ainos will scatter water bymeans of sieves, while others will take a porringer, ﬁt it up with
sails and oars as if it were a boat, and then push or draw itabout the village and gardens’.
2 In the same way, the fertility of
the earth is magically promoted by a dramatic representation ofhuman intercourse. Thus, to take one from a countless numberof instances, ‘in some parts of Java, at the season when thebloom will soon be on the rice, the husbandman and his wifevisit their ﬁelds by night and there engage in sexual inter-
course’ to encourage the fertility of the rice by their example.
3
There is a dread, however, that prohibited, incestuous sexual
1It seems probable that the biblical prohibition against making an image of any
living thing originated, not from any objection to the plastic arts, but from adesire to deprive magic (which was abominated by the Hebrew religion) ofone of its tools. Cf. Frazer (1911 a, 1, 87 n.).
2[Frazer (1911 a, 1, 251), quoting Batchelor (1901, 333).]
3Frazer (1911 a, 2, 98) [quoting Wilken (1884, 958)].animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 93relations may cause a failure of the crops and make the earth
sterile.’1
Certain negative observances, that is, magical precautions,
must be included in this ﬁrst group. ‘When a Dyak village has
turned out to hunt wild pigs in the jungle, the people who stayat home may not touch oil or water with their hands during theabsence of their friends; for if they did so, the hunters would allbe “butter- ﬁngered” and the prey would slip through their
hands.’
2 Or again, ‘while a Gilyak hunter is pursuing game in
the forest, his children at home are forbidden to make drawingson wood or on sand; for they fear that if the children did so, thepaths in the forest would become as perplexed as the lines in thedrawings, so that the hunter might lose his way and neverreturn.’
3
In these last, as in so many other instances of the workings of
magic, the element of distance is disregarded; in other words,telepathy is taken for granted. We shall ﬁnd no di ﬃculty,
therefore, in understanding this characteristic of magic.
There can be no doubt what is to be regarded as the operative
factor in all these examples. It is the similarity  between the act
performed and the result expected. For this reason Frazerdescribes this sort of magic as ‘imitative’ or ‘homœopathic’. If Iwish it to rain, I have only to do something that looks like rain oris reminiscent of rain. At a later stage of civilization, instead ofthis rain-magic, processions will be made to a temple andprayers for rain will be addressed to the deity living in it. Finally,this religious technique will in its turn be given up and attemptswill be made to produce e ﬀects in the atmosphere which will
lead to rain.
*
1An echo of this is to be found in the Œdipus Rex  of Sophocles [e.g. in the
prologue and ﬁrst Chorus].
2Frazer (1911 a, 1, 120) [quoting Roth (1896, 1, 430)].
3Frazer (1911 a, 1, 122) [quoting Labbé (1903, 268)].totem and taboo 94In a second group of magical acts the principle of similarity
plays no part, and its place is taken by another one, the nature ofwhich will at once become clear from the following examples.
There is another procedure by which an enemy can be
injured. One gets possession of some of his hair or nails or otherwaste products or even a piece of his clothing, and treats them insome hostile way. It is then exactly as though one had got pos-session of the man himself; and he himself experiences whateverit is that has been done to the objects that originated from him.In the view of primitive man, one of the most important parts ofa person is his name. So that if one knows the name of a man orof a spirit, one has obtained a certain amount of power over theowner of the name. This is the origin of the remarkable precau-tions and restrictions in the use of names which we have alreadytouched upon in the essay on taboo. (See p. 63 ﬀ.) In these
examples the place of similarity is evidently taken by a ﬃnity.
The higher motives for cannibalism among primitive races
have a similar origin. By incorporating parts of a person’s bodythrough the act of eating, one at the same time acquires thequalities possessed by him. This leads in certain circumstances toprecautions and restrictions in regard to diet. A woman who iswith child will avoid eating the ﬂesh of certain animals for fear
that any undesirable qualities they may have (cowardice, forinstance) might be passed over to the child that is nourished byher. The magical power is not a ﬀected even if the connection
between the two objects has already been severed or even if thecontact occurred only on a single important occasion. Forinstance, the belief that there is a magical bond between awound and the weapon which caused it may be traced unalteredfor thousands of years. If a Melanesian can obtain possession ofthe bow which caused his wound, he will keep it carefully in acool place so as to reduce the in ﬂammation of the wound. But if
the bow was left in the enemy’s possession, it will undoubtedlybe hung up close to the ﬁre so that the wound may becomeanimism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 95thoroughly hot and in ﬂamed.1 Pliny (in his Natural History , Book
xxviii [Chapter 7]) tells us that ‘if you have wounded a man andare sorry for it, you have only to spit on the hand that gave thewound, and the pain of the su ﬀerer will be instantly alleviated’.
[Frazer, loc. cit.] So, too, Francis Bacon (in his Sylva Sylvarum  [X,
§ 998]) mentions that ‘it is constantly received and avouchedthat the anointing of the weapon that maketh the wound willheal the wound itself’. English country people are said eventoday to follow this prescription, and if they cut themselves witha scythe carefully keep the instrument clean, to prevent thewound from festering. ‘At Norwich in June 1902 a womannamed Matilda Henry accidentally ran a nail into her foot. With-out examining the wound, or even removing her stocking, shecaused her daughter to grease the nail, saying that if this weredone no harm would come of the hurt. A few days afterwardsshe died of lockjaw’—as a result of this displaced antisepsis.(Frazer, ibid., 203.)
The last group of instances exemplify what Frazer dis-
tinguishes from ‘imitative’ magic under the name of ‘con-tagious’ magic. What is believed to be their e ﬀective principle is
no longer similarity but spacial connection, contiguity, or atleast imagined  contiguity—the recollection of it. Since, however,
similarity and contiguity are the two essential principles of pro-cesses of association, it appears that the true explanation of allthe folly of magical observances is the domination of the associ-ation of ideas. The aptness of Tylor’s description of magic whichI have already quoted [p. 79] now becomes evident: mistakingan ideal connection for a real one. Frazer (1911 a, 1, 420) has put
it almost in the same words: ‘Men mistook the order of theirideas for the order of nature, and hence imagined that thecontrol which they have, or seem to have, over their thoughts,
1[Frazer (1911 a, 1, 201), quoting Codrington (1891, 310).]totem and taboo 96permitted them to exercise a corresponding control over
things.’
We shall at ﬁrst be surprised to learn that this illuminating
explanation of magic has been rejected by some writers asunsatisfactory (e.g. Thomas, 1910–11 a). On re ﬂection, however,
it will be seen that the criticism is justi ﬁed. The associative
theory of magic merely explains the paths along which magicproceeds; it does not explain its true essence, namely the mis-understanding which leads it to replace the laws of nature bypsychological ones. Some dynamic factor is evidently missing.But whereas the critics of Frazer’s theory have gone astray intheir search for it, it will be easy to arrive at a satisfactory explan-ation of magic merely by carrying the associative theory furtherand deeper.
Let us consider ﬁrst the simpler and more important case of
imitative magic. According to Frazer (1911 a, 1, 54) it can be
practised by itself, whereas contagious magic as a rule presup-poses the other. It is easy to perceive the motives which leadmen to practise magic: they are human wishes. All we need tosuppose is that primitive man had an immense belief in thepower of his wishes. The basic reason why what he sets aboutby magical means comes to pass is, after all, simply that hewills it. To begin with, therefore, the emphasis is only upon hiswish.
Children are in an analogous psychical situation, though their
motor e ﬃciency is still undeveloped. I have elsewhere (1911 a)
put forward the hypothesis that, to begin with, they satisfy theirwishes in an hallucinatory manner, that is, they create a satisfy-ing situation by means of centrifugal excitations of their senseorgans. An adult primitive man has an alternative method opento him. His wishes are accompanied by a motor impulse, thewill, which is later destined to alter the whole face of the earth inorder to satisfy his wishes. This motor impulse is at ﬁrst
employed to give a representation of the satisfying situation inanimism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 97such a way that it becomes possible to experience the satisfaction
by means of what might be described as motor hallucinations.This kind of representation of a satis ﬁed wish is quite compar-
able to children’s play, which succeeds their earlier purely sens-ory technique of satisfaction. If children and primitive men ﬁnd
play and imitative representation enough for them, that is not asign of their being unassuming in our sense or of their resign-edly accepting their actual impotence. It is the easily understand-able result of the paramount virtue they ascribe to their wishes,of the will that is associated with those wishes and of themethods by which those wishes operate. As time goes on, thepsychological accent shifts from the motives  for the magical act on
to the measures  by which it is carried out—that is, on to the act
itself. (It would perhaps be more correct to say that it is onlythese measures that reveal to the subject the excessive valuationwhich he attaches to his psychical acts.) It thus comes to appearas though it is the magical act itself which, owing to its similar-ity with the desired result, alone determines the occurrence ofthat result. There is no opportunity, at the stage of animisticthinking, for showing any objective evidence of the true state ofaﬀairs. But a possibility of doing so does arrive at a later time,
when, though all of these procedures are still being carried out,the psychical phenomenon of doubt has begun to emerge as anexpression of a tendency to repression. At that point, men willbe ready to admit that conjuring up spirits has no result unless itis accompanied by faith, and that the magical power of prayerfails if there is no piety at work behind it.
1
The fact that it has been possible to construct a system of
contagious magic on associations of contiguity shows that theimportance attached to wishes and to the will has been extended
1Cf. the King in Hamlet (. 3):
‘My words ﬂy up, my thoughts remain below:
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.’totem and taboo 98from them on to all those psychical acts which are subject to
the will. A general over-valuation has thus come about of allmental processes—an attitude towards the world, that is,which, in view of our knowledge of the relation between real-ity and thought, cannot fail to strike us as an over-valuation of
the latter. Things become less important than ideas of things:whatever is done to the latter will inevitably also occur to theformer. Relations which hold between the ideas of things areassumed to hold equally between the things themselves. Sincedistance is of no importance in thinking—since what lies fur-thest apart both in time and space can without di ﬃculty be
comprehended in a single act of consciousness—so, too, theworld of magic has a telepathic disregard for spacial distanceand treats past situations as though they were present. In theanimistic epoch the re ﬂection of the internal world is bound to
blot out the other picture of the world—the one which we seem
to perceive.
It is further to be noticed that the two principles of
association—similarity and contiguity—are both included inthe more comprehensive concept of ‘contact’. Association bycontiguity is contact in the literal sense; association by similarityis contact in the metaphorical sense. The use of the same wordfor the two kinds of relation is no doubt accounted for by someidentity in the psychical processes concerned which we have notyet grasped. We have here the same range of meaning of the ideaof ‘contact’ as we found in our analysis of taboo.
1
By way of summary, then, it may be said that the principle
governing magic, the technique of the animistic mode ofthinking, is the principle of the ‘omnipotence of thoughts’.
1Cf. the second essay in this volume [p. 32].animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 99(3)
I have adopted the term ‘omnipotence of thoughts’ from a
highly intelligent man who su ﬀered from obsessional ideas and
who, after having been set right by psycho-analytical treatment,was able to give evidence of his e ﬃciency and good sense. (Cf.
Freud, 1909 b.) He had coined the phrase as an explanation of all
the strange and uncanny events by which he, like othersaﬄicted with the same illness, seemed to be pursued. If he
thought of someone, he would be sure to meet that very personimmediately afterwards, as though by magic. If he suddenlyasked after the health of an acquaintance whom he had not seenfor a long time, he would hear that he had just died, so that itwould look as though a telepathic message had arrived fromhim. If, without any really serious intention, he swore at somestranger, he might be sure that the man would die soon after-wards, so that he would feel responsible for his death. In thecourse of the treatment he himself was able to tell me how thedeceptive appearance arose in most of these cases, and by whatcontrivances he himself had helped to strengthen his own super-stitious beliefs. All obsessional neurotics are superstitious in thisway, usually against their better judgment.
1
It is in obsessional neuroses that the survival of the omnipo-
tence of thoughts is most clearly visible and that the con-sequences of this primitive mode of thinking come closest toconsciousness. But we must not be misled into supposing that itis a distinguishing feature of this particular neurosis, for analyticinvestigation reveals the same thing in the other neuroses as well.In all of them what determines the formation of symptoms is the
1We appear to attribute an ‘uncanny’ quality to impressions that seek to
conﬁrm the omnipotence of thoughts and the animistic mode of thinking in
general, after we have reached a stage at which, in our judgment , we have
abandoned such beliefs. [Cf. Freud’s subsequent paper on ‘The Uncanny’
(1919).]totem and taboo 100reality not of experience but of thought. Neurotics live in a
world apart, where, as I have said elsewhere [1911 a, English
translation, 20], only ‘neurotic currency’ is legal tender; that isto say, they are only a ﬀected by what is thought with intensity
and pictured with emotion, whereas agreement with externalreality is a matter of no importance. What hysterics repeat intheir attacks and ﬁx by means of their symptoms are experiences
which have occurred in that form only in their imagination—though it is true that in the last resort those imagined experi-ences go back to actual events or are based upon them. Toattribute the neurotic sense of guilt to real misdeeds wouldshow an equal misunderstanding. An obsessional neurotic maybe weighed down by a sense of guilt that would be appropri-ate in a mass-murderer, while in fact, from his childhoodonwards, he has behaved to his fellow-men as the most con-siderate and scrupulous member of society. Nevertheless, hissense of guilt has a justi ﬁcation: it is founded on the intense
and frequent death-wishes against his fellows which areunconsciously at work in him. It has a justi ﬁcation if what we
take into account are unconscious thoughts and not intentionaldeeds. Thus the omnipotence of thoughts, the over-valuationof mental processes as compared with reality, is seen to haveunrestricted play in the emotional life of neurotic patients andin everything that derives from it. If one of them undergoespsycho-analytic treatment, which makes what is unconsciousin him conscious, he will be unable to believe that thoughtsare free and will constantly be afraid of expressing evil wishes,as though their expression would lead inevitably to their ful-ﬁlment. This behaviour, as well as the superstitions which he
practises in ordinary life, reveals his resemblance to the savageswho believe they can alter the external world by merethinking.
The primary obsessive acts of these neurotics are of an entirely
magical character. If they are not charms, they are at all eventsanimism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 101counter-charms, designed to ward o ﬀ the expectations of
disaster with which the neurosis usually starts. Whenever I havesucceeded in penetrating the mystery, I have found that theexpected disaster was death. Schopenhauer has said that theproblem of death stands at the outset of every philosophy; andwe have already seen [p. 65] that the origin of the belief in soulsand in demons, which is the essence of animism, goes back tothe impression which is made upon men by death. It is di ﬃcult
to judge whether the obsessive or protective acts performed byobsessional neurotics follow the law of similarity (or, as the casemay be, of contrast); for as a rule, owing to the prevailingconditions of the neurosis, they have been distorted by beingdisplaced on to some detail, on to some action which is initself of the greatest triviality.
1 The protective formulas of
obsessional neuroses, too, have their counterpart in the formu-las of magic. It is possible, however, to describe the course ofdevelopment of obsessive acts: we can show how they begin bybeing as remote as possible from anything sexual—magicaldefences against evil wishes—and how they end by being sub-stitutes for the forbidden sexual act and the closest possibleimitations of it.
If we are prepared to accept the account given above of the
evolution of human views of the universe—an animistic phasefollowed by a religious phase and this in turn by a scienti ﬁc
one—it will not be di ﬃcult to follow the vicissitudes of the
‘omnipotence of thoughts’ through these di ﬀerent phases. At
the animistic stage men ascribe omnipotence to themselves . At the
religious stage they transfer it to the gods but do not seriouslyabandon it themselves, for they reserve the power ofinﬂuencing the gods in a variety of ways according to their
1A further motive for such displacement on to a trivial action will appear in
what follows.totem and taboo 102wishes. The scienti ﬁc view of the universe no longer a ﬀords any
room for human omnipotence; men have acknowledged theirsmallness and submitted resignedly to death and to the othernecessities of nature. None the less some of the primitive beliefin omnipotence still survives in men’s faith in the powerof the human mind, taking account, as it does, of the laws ofreality.
If we trace back the development of libidinal trends as we ﬁnd
them in the individual from their adult forms to the ﬁrst begin-
nings in childhood, an important distinction emerges, which Ihave described in my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality  (1905 a).
Manifestations of the sexual instincts can be observed from thevery ﬁrst, but to begin with they are not yet directed towards any
external object. The separate instinctual components of sexualitywork independently of one another to obtain pleasure and ﬁnd
satisfaction in the subject’s own body. This stage is known as thatof auto-erotism and it is succeeded by one in which an object ischosen.
Further study has shown that it is expedient and indeed
indispensable to insert a third stage between these two, or, put-ting it in another way, to divide the ﬁrst stage, that of auto-
erotism, into two. At this intermediate stage, the importance ofwhich is being made more and more evident by research, thehitherto isolated sexual instincts have already come together intoa single whole and have also found an object. But this object isnot an external one, extraneous to the subject, but it is his ownego, which has been constituted at about this same time. Bearingin mind pathological ﬁxations of this new stage, which become
observable later, we have given it the name of ‘narcissism’. Thesubject behaves as though he were in love with himself; hisegoistic instincts and his libidinal wishes are not yet separableunder our analysis.
Although we are not yet in a position to describe with suf-
ﬁcient accuracy the characteristics of this narcissistic stage, atanimism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 103which the hitherto dissociated sexual instincts come together
into a single unity and cathect1 the ego as an object, we suspect
already that this narcissistic organization is never wholly aban-doned. A human being remains to some extent narcissistic evenafter he has found external objects for his libido. The cathexes ofobjects which he e ﬀects are as it were emanations of the libido
that still remains in his ego and can be drawn back into it oncemore. The state of being in love, which is psychologically soremarkable and is the normal prototype of the psychoses, showsthese emanations at their maximum compared to the level ofself-love.
Primitive men and neurotics, as we have seen, attach a high
valuation—in our eyes an over-valuation—to psychical acts.
This attitude may plausibly be brought into relation with nar-cissism and regarded as an essential component of it. It maybe said that in primitive men the process of thinking is still toa great extent sexualized. This is the origin of their belief inthe omnipotence of thoughts, their unshakable con ﬁdence in
the possibility of controlling the world and their inaccess-ibility to the experiences, so easily obtainable, which couldteach them man’s true position in the universe. As regardsneurotics, we ﬁnd that on the one hand a considerable part of
this primitive attitude has survived in their constitution, andon the other hand that the sexual repression that has occurredin them has brought about a further sexualization of theirthinking processes. The psychological results must be thesame in both cases, whether the libidinal hypercathexis ofthinking is an original one or has been produced by
1[The words ‘cathexis’ and ‘to cathect’ are used as renderings of the German
‘Besetzung ’ and ‘ besetzen ’. They are the terms with which Freud expresses the idea
of psychical energy being lodged in or attaching itself to mental structures orprocesses, somewhat on the analogy of an electric charge.]totem and taboo
104regression: intellectual narcissism and the omnipotence of
thoughts.1
If we may regard the existence among primitive races of the
omnipotence of thoughts as evidence in favour of narcissism, weare encouraged to attempt a comparison between the phases inthe development of men’s view of the universe and the stages ofan individual’s libidinal development. The animistic phasewould correspond to narcissism both chronologically and in itscontent; the religious phase would correspond to the stage ofobject-choice of which the characteristic is a child’s attachmentto his parents; while the scienti ﬁc phase would have an exact
counterpart in the stage at which an individual has reachedmaturity, has renounced the pleasure principle, adjusted himselfto reality and turned to the external world for the object of hisdesires.
2
In only a single ﬁeld of our civilization has the omnipotence
of thoughts been retained, and that is in the ﬁeld of art. Only in
art does it still happen that a man who is consumed by desiresperforms something resembling the accomplishment of thosedesires and that what he does in play produces emotionaleﬀects—thanks to artistic illusion—just as though it were some-
thing real. People speak with justice of the ‘magic of art’ andcompare artists to magicians. But the comparison is perhapsmore signi ﬁcant than it claims to be. There can be no doubt that
art did not begin as art for art’s sake. It worked originally in theservice of impulses which are for the most part extinct to-day.
1‘It is almost an axiom with writers on this subject, that a sort of Solipsism, or
Berkleianism (as Professor Sully terms it as he ﬁnds it in the Child), operates in
the savage to make him refuse to recognize death as a fact.’ (Marett, 1900,178.)
2I will only brie ﬂy allude here to the fact that the original narcissism of
children has a decisive in ﬂuence upon our view of the development of their
character and excludes the possibility of their having any primary sense ofinferiority.animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts
105And among them we may suspect the presence of many magical
purposes.1
(4)
Thus the ﬁrst picture which man formed of the world—
animism—was a psychological one. It needed no scienti ﬁc basis
as yet, since science only begins after it has been realized that theworld is unknown and that means must therefore be sought forgetting to know it. Animism came to primitive man naturallyand as a matter of course. He knew what things were like in theworld, namely just as he felt himself to be. We are thus preparedto ﬁnd that primitive man transposed the structural conditions
of his own mind
2 into the external world; and we may attempt
to reverse the process and put back into the human mind whatanimism teaches as to the nature of things.
The technique of animism, magic, reveals in the clearest and
most unmistakable way an intention to impose the laws govern-ing mental life upon real things; in this, spirits need not as yet
1Cf. Reinach, ‘L’art et la magie’ (1905–12, 1, 125–36). In Reinach’s opinion
the primitive artists who left behind the carvings and paintings of animals inthe French caves, did not desire to ‘please’ but to ‘evoke’ or conjure up. He thusexplains why it is that these pictures are situated in the darkest and mostinaccessible parts of the caves and that dangerous beasts of prey do not appearamong them. ‘Les modernes parlent souvent, par hyperbole, de la magie dupinceau ou du ciseau d’un grand artiste et, en général, de la magie de l’art.Entendu au sens propre, qui est celui d’une contrainte mystique exercée par lavolonté de l’homme sur d’autres volontés ou sur les choses, cette expression
n’est plus admissible; mais nous avons vu qu’elle était autrefois rigoureuse-
ment vraie, du moins dans l’opinion des artistes.’ (Ibid., 136.) [‘In moderntimes people often speak metaphorically of the magic of a great artist’s brushor chisel, or more generally of the magic of art. This expression is no longerpermissible in its proper sense of a mystical force brought to bear by thehuman will upon other wills or upon objects; but, as we have seen, there was atime when it was literally true—at least in the artists’ opinion.’]
2Which he was aware of by what is known as endopsychic perception.totem and taboo 106play any part, though spirits may be taken as objects of magical
treatment. Thus the assumptions of magic are more fundamentaland older than the doctrine of spirits, which forms the kernel ofanimism. Our psycho-analytic point of view coincides here witha theory put forward by R. R. Marett (1900), who postulates apre-animistic stage before animism, the character of which isbest indicated by the term ‘animatism’, the doctrine of the uni-versality of life. Experience has little light to throw on pre-animism, since no race has yet been discovered which is withoutthe concept of spirits. (Cf. Wundt, 1906, 171 ﬀ.)
Whereas magic still reserves omnipotence solely for thoughts,
animism hands some of it over to spirits and so prepares the wayfor the construction of a religion. What, we may ask, can haveinduced a primitive man to make this ﬁrst act of renunciation? It
can scarcely have been a recognition of the falseness of his prem-ises, for he continued to practise the magical technique.
Spirits and demons, as I have shown in the last essay, are only
projections of man’s own emotional impulses.
1 He turns his
emotional cathexes into persons, he peoples the world withthem and meets his internal mental processes again outsidehimself—in just the same way as that intelligent paranoiac,Schreber, found a re ﬂection of the attachments and detachments
of his libido in the vicissitudes of his confabulated ‘rays of God’.
2
I propose to avoid (as I have already done elsewhere3) entering
into the general problem of the origin of the tendency to projectmental processes into the outside. It is, however, safe to assumethat that tendency will be intensi ﬁed when projection promises
to bring with it the advantage of mental relief. Such an advantage
1I assume that at this early narcissistic stage cathexes arising from libidinal and
from other sources of excitation may still be indistinguishable from oneanother.
2Cf. Schreber (1903) and Freud (1911 b).
3In my paper on Schreber (Freud, 1911 b [English translation, 452]).animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 107may be expected with certainty where a con ﬂict has arisen
between di ﬀerent impulses all of which are striving towards
omnipotence—for they clearly cannot all become omnipotent.
The pathological process in paranoia in fact makes use of themechanism of projection in order to deal with mental con ﬂicts
of this kind. The typical case of such a con ﬂict is one between
the two members of a pair of opposites—the case of an ambiva-lent attitude, which we have examined in detail as it appears insomeone mourning the death of a loved relative. [Cf. p. 60 ﬀ.]
This kind of case must seem particularly likely to provide amotive for the creation of projections. Here again we are inagreement with the writers who maintain that the ﬁrstborn
spirits were evil spirits, and who derive the idea of a soul from
the impression made by death upon the survivors. The onlydiﬀerence is that we do not lay stress on the intellectual  problem
with which death confronts the living; in our view the forcewhich gives the impetus to research is rather to be attributedto the emotional  conﬂict into which the survivors are plunged.
Thus man’s ﬁrst theoretical achievement—the creation of
spirits—seems to have arisen from the same source as the ﬁrst
moral restrictions to which he was subjected—the observancesof taboo. The fact that they had the same origin need not imply,however, that they arose simultaneously. If the survivors’position in relation to the dead was really what ﬁrst caused
primitive man to re ﬂect, and compelled him to hand over some
of his omnipotence to the spirits and to sacri ﬁce some of his
freedom of action, then these cultural products would constitutea ﬁrst acknowledgment of 
᾿ Ανα ´ γκη  [Necessity], which opposes
human narcissism. Primitive man would thus be submitting tothe supremacy of death with the same gesture with which heseemed to be denying it.
If we may venture to exploit our hypothesis still further, we
may inquire which essential part of our psychological structuretotem and taboo 108is reﬂected and reproduced in the projective creation of souls
and spirits. It could scarcely be disputed that the primitive con-ception of a soul, however much it may di ﬀer from the later,
purely immaterial soul, is nevertheless intrinsically the same;that is to say, it assumes that both persons and things are of adouble nature and that their known attributes and modi ﬁcations
are distributed between their two component portions. This ori-ginal ‘duality’, to borrow an expression from Herbert Spencer(1893), is identical with the dualism proclaimed by our currentdistinction between soul and body and by such ineradicablelinguistic expressions of it as the use of phrases like ‘besidehimself’ or ‘coming to himself’ in relation to ﬁts of rage or
fainting (ibid., 144).
When we, no less than primitive man, project something into
external reality, what is happening must surely be this: we arerecognizing the existence of two states—one in which some-thing is directly given to the senses and to consciousness (that is,is present  to them), and alongside it another, in which the same
thing is latent but capable of re-appearing. In short, we are recog-
nizing the co-existence of perception and memory, or, putting itmore generally, the existence of unconscious  mental processes
alongside the conscious  ones.
1 It might be said that in the last
analysis the ‘spirit’ of persons or things comes down to theircapacity to be remembered and imagined after perception ofthem has ceased.
It is not, of course, to be expected that either the primitive or
the present-day concept of a ‘soul’ will be separated from that ofthe other portion of the personality by the same line of demarca-tion which our modern science draws between conscious andunconscious mental activity. The animistic soul unites propertiesfrom both sides. Its volatile and mobile quality, its power of
1Cf. my short paper, ‘A Note on the Unconscious in Psycho-Analysis’, ﬁrst
published in the Proceedings  of the Society for Psychical Research in 1912.animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 109leaving the body and of taking possession, temporarily or per-
manently, of another body—these are characteristics whichremind us unmistakably of the nature of consciousness. But theway in which it remains concealed behind the manifest person-ality is reminiscent of the unconscious; immutability andindestructibility are qualities which we no longer attribute toconscious but rather to unconscious processes, and we regardthe latter as the true vehicle of mental activity.
I have already said that animism is a system of thought, the
ﬁrst complete theory of the universe, and I shall now go on to
draw certain conclusions from the psycho-analytic view of suchsystems. Every day of our lives our experience is in a position toshow us the principal characteristics of a ‘system’. We havedreams during the night and we have learnt how to interpretthem during the day. Dreams may, without contradicting theirnature, appear confused and disconnected. But they may, on thecontrary, simulate the orderly impressions of a real experience,they may make one event follow from another and make oneportion of their content refer to another. Such a result can bemore or less successfully achieved; but it scarcely ever succeedsso completely as to leave no absurdity, no rift in its texture,visible. When we come to submit a dream to interpretation, weﬁnd that the erratic and irregular arrangement of its constituent
parts is quite unimportant from the point of view of our under-standing it. The essential elements in a dream are the dream-thoughts, and these have meaning, connection and order. Buttheir order is quite other than that remembered by us in themanifest content of the dream. In the latter the connectionbetween the dream-thoughts has been abandoned and mayeither remain completely lost or be replaced by the new connec-tion exhibited in the manifest content. The elements of thedream, apart from their being condensed, are almost invariablyarranged in a new order more or less independent of theirtotem and taboo 110earlier arrangement. Finally, it must be added that whatever the
original material of the dream-thoughts has been turned into bythe dream-activity is then subjected to a further in ﬂuence. This is
what is known as ‘secondary revision’,
1 and its purpose is evi-
dently to get rid of the disconnectedness and unintelligibilityproduced by the dream-activity and replace it by a new ‘mean-ing’. But this new meaning, arrived at by secondary revision, isno longer the meaning of the dream-thoughts.
2
The secondary revision of the product of dream-activity is an
admirable example of the nature and pretensions of a system.There is an intellectual function in us which demands unity,connection and intelligibility from any material, whether of per-ception or thought, that comes within its grasp; and if, as a resultof special circumstances, it is unable to establish a true connec-tion, it does not hesitate to fabricate a false one. Systems con-structed in this way are known to us not only from dreams, butalso from phobias, from obsessive thinking and from delusions.The construction of systems is seen most strikingly in delusionaldisorders (in paranoia), where it dominates the symptomaticpicture; but its occurrence in other forms of neuro-psychosismust not be overlooked. In all these cases it can be shown that arearrangement of the psychical material has been made with afresh aim in view; and the rearrangement may often have to be adrastic one if the outcome is to be made to appear intelligiblefrom the point of view of the system. Thus a system is bestcharacterized by the fact that at least two reasons can be dis-covered for each of its products: a reason based upon the prem-ises of the system (a reason, then, which may be delusional)and a concealed reason, which we must judge to be the trulyoperative and the real one.
1[‘Sekundäre Bearbeitung .’ The usual but misleading English translation of
this term is ‘secondary elaboration’.]
2[Cf. The Interpretation of Dreams  (1900), English translation, 1932, 451 ﬀ.]animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 111This may be illustrated by an example from a neurosis. In my
essay on taboo I mentioned a woman patient of mine whoseobsessional prohibitions showed the most perfect agreementwith a Maori taboo (p. 33). This woman’s neurosis was aimed ather husband and culminated in her defence against anunconscious wish that he should die. Her manifest, systematicphobia, however, related to the mention of death in general,while her husband was entirely excluded from it and was neveran object of her conscious solicitude. One day she heard herhusband giving instructions that his razors, which had lost theiredge, were to be taken to a particular shop to be re-set. Driven bya strange uneasiness, she herself set o ﬀ for the shop. After recon-
noitring the ground, she came back and insisted that her hus-band should get rid of the razors for good and all, since she haddiscovered that next door to the shop he had named there was anundertaker’s establishment: owing to the plan he had made, shesaid, the razors had become inextricably involved with thoughtsof death. This, then, was the systematic  reason for her prohibition.
We may be quite sure that, even without her discovery of thenext-door shop, the patient would have come home with aprohibition against the razors. It would have been enough ifshe had met a hearse on her way to the shop, or someonedressed in mourning or carrying a funeral wreath. The net ofpossible determinants for the prohibition was spread wideenough to catch the quarry in any event; it merely dependedon her decision whether to draw it together or not. It could beshown that on other occasions she would not put thedeterminants into operation, and she would explain this bysaying it had been ‘a better day’. The real cause of her prohibi-
tion upon the razors was, of course, as it was easy to discover,her repugnance to attaching any pleasurable feeling to the ideathat her husband might cut his throat with the newly groundrazors.
In just the same way, an inhibition upon movement (an abasiatotem and taboo 112or an agoraphobia) will gradually become more complete and
more detailed, when once that system has succeeded in install-ing itself as a representative of an unconscious wish and of thedefence against the wish. Whatever other unconscious phan-tasies and operative reminiscences may be present in the patientforce their way to expression as symptoms along this same path,once it has been opened, and group themselves into anappropriate new arrangement within the framework of theinhibition upon movement. Thus it would be a vain and indeeda foolish task to attempt to understand the complexities anddetails of the symptoms of (for example) an agoraphobia on thebasis of its underlying premises; for the whole consistency andstrictness of the combination are merely apparent . Just as with the
façades of dreams, if we look more attentively we ﬁnd the most
blatant inconsistency and arbitrariness in the structure of symp-toms. The real reason for the details of a systematic phobia ofthis kind lies in concealed determinants, which need have noth-ing to do with an inhibition upon movement; and that, too, iswhy these phobias take such various and contradictory shapes indiﬀerent people.
Let us now return to the animistic system with which we are
dealing. The insight we have gained into other psychological
systems enables us to conclude that with primitive man, too,‘superstition’ need not be the only or the real reason for someparticular custom or observance and does not excuse us from theduty of searching for its hidden motives. Under the dominationof an animistic system it is inevitable that every observance andevery activity shall have a systematic basis, which nowadayswe describe as ‘superstitious’. ‘Superstition’—like ‘anxiety’,‘dreams’ and ‘demons’—is one of those provisional psycho-logical concepts which have crumbled under the impact ofpsycho-analytic research. Once we have penetrated behind theseconstructions, which are like screens erected as defences againstcorrect understanding, we begin to realize that the mental lifeanimism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 113and cultural level of savages have not hitherto had all the recogni-
tion they deserve.
If we take instinctual repression as a measure of the level of
civilization that has been reached, we shall have to admit thateven under the animistic system advances and developmentstook place which are unjustly despised on account of theirsuperstitious basis. When we are told that the warriors in asavage tribe practise the greatest continence and cleanlinesswhen they go on the war-path, the explanation is put forwardthat their motive is ‘a fear lest the enemy should obtain therefuse of their persons, and thus be enabled to work theirdestruction by magic’ (Frazer, 1911 b, 157); and an analogous
superstitious reason could be suggested for their continence.None the less the fact remains that they have made an instinctualrenunciation; and we can understand the position better if wesuppose that the savage warrior submits to these restrictions as acountermeasure because he is on the point of yielding com-pletely to the satisfaction of cruel and hostile impulses which areas a rule prohibited to him. The same is true of the numerouscases of sexual restrictions being imposed on anyone who isengaged on di ﬃcult or responsible work (ibid., 200 f.). Though
the grounds alleged for these prohibitions may belong to amagical context, yet the fundamental idea of gaining greaterstrength by renouncing some instinctual satisfaction remainsunmistakable; and the hygienic root of the prohibition whichlies alongside its magical rationalization must not be overlooked.When the men of a savage tribe go out on an expedition to hunt,to ﬁsh, to ﬁght or to gather precious plants, their wives left at
home are subjected to many oppressive restrictions, to whichthe savages themselves ascribe a favourable in ﬂuence, operating
at a distance upon the success of the expedition. But it requiresvery little penetration to see that this factor which operates at adistance is nothing other than the absent men’s longingthoughts of home, and that behind these disguises lies a soundtotem and taboo 114piece of psychological insight that the men will only do their
best if they feel completely secure about the women whom theyhave left behind them unguarded. Sometimes they will eventhemselves declare, without alleging any magical reasons, that awife’s in ﬁdelity in marriage will bring to nothing the e ﬀorts of
an absent husband engaged on some responsible work.
The countless taboo regulations to which the women in sav-
age communities are subject during menstruation are said to bedue to a superstitious horror of blood, and this is no doubt infact one of their determinants. But it would be wrong to over-look the possibility that in this case the horror of blood alsoserves æsthetic and hygienic purposes, which are obliged inevery case to cloak themselves behind magical motives.
I am under no illusion that in putting forward these attempted
explanations I am laying myself open to the charge of endowingmodern savages with a subtlety in their mental activities whichexceeds all probability. It seems to me quite possible, however,that the same may be true of our attitude towards the psycho-logy of those races that have remained at the animistic level as istrue of our attitude towards the mental life of children, whichwe adults no longer understand and whose fullness and delicacyof feeling we have in consequence so greatly underestimated.
One further group of taboo observances, which have not
hitherto been accounted for, deserve mention, since they admitof an explanation which is familiar to psycho-analysts. Amongmany savage peoples there is a prohibition against keeping sharpweapons or cutting instruments in a house. Frazer (1911 b, 238)
quotes a German superstition to the e ﬀect that a knife should not
be left edge upwards, for fear that God and the angels might beinjured on it. May we not recognize in this taboo a premonitorywarning against possible ‘symptomatic acts’ in the execution ofwhich a sharp weapon might be employed by unconscious evilimpulses?animism, magic and the omnipotence of thoughts 1154
THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM
IN CHILDHOOD
There are no grounds for fearing that psycho-analysis, which
ﬁrst discovered that psychical acts and structures are invariably
over-determined,1 will be tempted to trace the origin of any-
thing so complicated as religion to a single source. If psycho-analysis is compelled—and is, indeed, in duty bound—to lay allthe emphasis upon one particular source, that does not mean itis claiming either that that source is the only one or that itoccupies ﬁrst place among the numerous contributory factors.
Only when we can synthesize the ﬁndings in the di ﬀerent ﬁelds
of research will it become possible to arrive at the relativeimportance of the part played in the genesis of religion by themechanism discussed in these pages. Such a task lies beyond themeans as well as beyond the purposes of a psycho-analyst.
1[I.e. have two or more simultaneous determinants.](1)
In the ﬁrst of this series of essays we became acquainted with the
concept of totemism. We heard that totemism is a system whichtakes the place of a religion among certain primitive peoples ofAustralia, America and Africa, and provides the basis of theirsocial organization. As we have heard, it was a Scotsman,McLennan, who in 1869 ﬁrst drew general attention to the phe-
nomena of totemism (which had hitherto been regarded asmere curiosities) by giving voice to a suspicion that a largenumber of customs and usages current in various societiesancient and modern were to be explained as remnants of atotemic age. Since that date science has fully accepted his esti-mate of totemism. Let me quote, as one of the most recentstatements on the subject, a passage from Wundt’s Elemente der
Völkerpsychologie  (1912, 139): ‘In the light of all these facts, the
conclusion appears highly probable that at some time totemicculture everywhere paved the way for a more advanced civiliza-tion, and, thus, that it represents a transitional stage between theage of primitive men and the era of heroes and gods.’ [Englishtranslation, 139.]
The purpose of the present essays obliges us to enter more
deeply into the nature of totemism. For reasons which willpresently become clear I will begin with an account given byReinach, who, in 1900.
1 sketched out a ‘ Code du totémisme ’ in
twelve Articles—a catechism, as it were, of the totemic religion:
(1) Certain animals may neither be killed nor eaten, but indi-
vidual members of the species are reared by human beingsand cared for by them.
(2) An animal which has died an accidental death is mourned
1Cf. Reinach (1905–12, 1, 17 ﬀ.).the return of totemism in childhood 117over and buried with the same honours as a member of
the clan.
(3) In some instances the eating prohibition extends only to
one particular part of the animal’s body.
(4) When one of the animals which are usually spared has to
be killed under the stress of necessity, apologies areoﬀered to it and an attempt is made by means of various
artiﬁces and evasions to mitigate the violation of the
taboo—that is to say, of the murder.
(5) When the animal is made the victim of a ritual sacri ﬁce, is
solemnly bewailed.
(6) On particular solemn occasions and at religious cere-
monies the skins of certain animals are worn. Wheretotemism is still in force, they are the totem animals.
(7) Clans and individuals adopt the names of animals—viz. of
the totem animals.
(8) Many clans make use of representations of animals on
their standards and weapons; the men have pictures ofanimals painted or tattooed on their bodies.
(9) If the totem is a formidable or dangerous animal, it is
supposed to spare members of the clan named after it.
(10) The totem animal protects and gives warning to members
of its clan.
(11) The totem animal foretells the future to the loyal members
of its clan and serves them as guide.
(12) The members of the totemic clan often believe that they
are related to the totem animal by the bond of a commonancestry.
This catechism of the totemic religion can only be seen at its
proper value if we take into account the fact that Reinach hasincluded in it all the indications and traces from which theearlier existence of a totemic system can be inferred. Theauthor’s peculiar attitude to the problem is shown by histotem and taboo 118partial neglect of the essential features of totemism. As we shall
see, he has relegated one of the two principal articles of thetotemic catechism to the background and entirely overlookedthe other.
To obtain a correct picture of the nature of totemism we must
turn to another author, who has devoted a four-volume work tothe subject, which combines the fullest collection of the relevantobservations with the most detailed discussion of the problemsthey raise. We shall remain indebted to J. G. Frazer, the author ofT otemism and Exogamy  (1910), both for enjoyment and instruction,
even if psycho-analytic research may lead to conclusions whichdiﬀer widely from his.
1
1It may be as well, however, to warn the reader, in advance, of the di ﬃculties
with which any statements on the subject have to contend.
In the ﬁrst place, those who collect the observations are not the same as
those who examine and discuss them. The former are travellers and missionar-ies while the latter are students who may never have set eyes on the objects oftheir researches. Again, communication with savages is not an easy matter. Theobservers are not always acquainted with the native language but may beobliged to rely on the help of interpreters or to conduct their inquiries throughthe medium of pidgin-English. Savages are not communicative on the subjectof the most intimate details of their cultural life and they talk openly only tothose foreigners who have lived among them for many years. They often givefalse or misleading information for a great variety of motives. (Cf. Frazer, 1910,1, 150 f.) It should not be forgotten that primitive races are not young races
but are in fact as old as civilized races. There is no reason to suppose that, forthe bene ﬁt of our information, they have retained their original ideas and
institutions undeveloped and undistorted. On the contrary, it is certain thatthere have been profound changes in every direction among primitive races, sothat it is never possible to decide without hesitation how far their present-dayconditions and opinions preserve the primæval past in a petri ﬁed form and
how far they are distortions and modi ﬁcations of it. Hence arise the all-too-
frequent disputes among the authorities as to which characteristics of a primi-tive civilization are to be regarded as primary and as to which are later andsecondary developments. The determination of the original state of things thusthe return of totemism in childhood
119‘A totem’, wrote Frazer in his ﬁrst essay on the subject,1 ‘is a
class of material objects which a savage regards with supersti-tious respect, believing that there exists between him and everymember of the class an intimate and altogether special rela-tion. . . .The connection between a man and his totem is mutu-
ally bene ﬁcent; the totem protects the man, and the man shows
his respect for the totem in various ways, by not killing it if it bean animal, and not cutting or gathering it if it be a plant. Asdistinguished from a fetish, a totem is never an isolated indi-vidual, but always a class of objects, generally a species of ani-mals or of plants, more rarely a class of inanimate naturalobjects, very rarely a class of arti ﬁcial objects ....
‘Totems are of at least three kinds: (1) the clan totem, com-
mon to a whole clan, and passing by inheritance from genera-tion to generation; (2) the sex totem, common either to all themales or to all the females of a tribe, to the exclusion in eithercase of the other sex; (3) the individual totem, belonging to asingle individual and not passing to his descendants .... ’
The last two kinds of totem do not compare in signi ﬁcance
with the clan totem. Unless we are quite mistaken, they are latedevelopments and of little importance for the essential nature ofthe totem.
‘The clan totem is reverenced by a body of men and women
who call themselves by the name of the totem, believe them-selves to be of one blood, descendants of a common ancestor,and are bound together by common obligations to each otherand by a common faith in the totem. Totemism is thus both areligious and a social system. In its religious aspect it consists of
invariably remains a matter of construction. Finally, it is not easy to feel one’s
way into primitive modes of thinking. We misunderstand primitive men just aseasily as we do children, and we are always apt to interpret their actions andfeelings according to our own mental constellations.
1T otemism , Edinburgh, 1887, reprinted in Frazer (1910, 1, 3 ﬀ.).totem and taboo 120the relations of mutual respect and protection between a man
and his totem; in its social aspect it consists of the relations of theclansmen to each other and to men of other clans. In the laterhistory of totemism these two sides, the religious and the social,tend to part company; the social system sometimes survives thereligious; and, on the other hand, religion sometimes bearstraces of totemism in countries where the social system based ontotemism has disappeared. How in the origin of totemism thesetwo sides were related to each other it is, in our ignorance of thatorigin, impossible to say with certainty. But on the whole theevidence points strongly to the conclusion that the two sideswere originally inseparable; that, in other words, the farther wego back, the more we should ﬁnd that the clansman regards
himself and his totem as beings of the same species, and the lesshe distinguishes between conduct towards his totem andtowards his fellow-clansmen.’
In giving particulars of totemism as a religious system,
Frazer begins by stating that the members of a totem clan callthemselves by the name of their totem, and commonly believethemselves to be actually descended from it.
1 It follows from this
belief that they will not hunt the totem animal or kill or eat itand, if it is something other than an animal, they refrain frommaking use of it in other ways. The rules against killing or eatingthe totem are not the only taboos; sometimes they are forbiddento touch it, or even to look at it; in a number of cases the totemmay not be spoken of by its proper name. Any violation of thetaboos that protect the totem are automatically punished bysevere illness or death.
2
Specimens of the totem animal are occasionally reared by the
clan and cared for in captivity.3 A totem animal that is found
1[The last nine words are printed in spaced type in the original.]
2Cf. my earlier essay on taboo [above, p. 24].
3As is done to this day with the she-wolf in her cage beside the steps leading
up to the Capitol in Rome and with the bears in their den at Berne.the return of totemism in childhood 121dead is mourned for and buried like a dead clansman. If it is
necessary to kill a totem animal, this is done according to aprescribed ritual of apologies and ceremonies of expiation.
The clan expects to receive protection and care from its totem.
If it is a dangerous animal (such as a beast of prey or a venomoussnake) there is a presumption that it will do no harm to itsclansmen; and if that expectation is not ful ﬁlled the injured man
is expelled from the clan. Oaths, in Frazer’s opinion, were ori-ginally ordeals; thus, many tests of descent and legitimacy weresubmitted for decision to the totem. The totem gives help insickness and delivers omens and warnings to its clan. Theappearance of the totem in or about a house is often regarded asan omen of death; the totem has come to fetch his kinsman.
1
In particular important circumstances the clansman seeks to
emphasize his kinship with the totem by making himselfresemble it externally, by dressing in the skin of the animal, byincising a picture of the totem upon his own body, and so on.This identi ﬁcation with the totem is carried into e ﬀect in actions
and words on the ceremonial occasions of birth, initiation andburial. Various magical and religious purposes are served bydances in which all the clansmen disguise themselves as theirtotem and imitate its behaviour. Lastly, there are ceremonies inwhich the totem animal is ceremoniously killed.
2
The social aspect of totemism is principally expressed in a
severely enforced injunction and a sweeping restriction.
The members of a totem clan are brothers and sisters and are
bound to help and protect one another. If a member of a clan iskilled by someone outside it, the whole clan of the aggressor isresponsible for the deed and the whole clan of the murderedman is at one in demanding satisfaction for the blood that hasbeen shed. The totem bond is stronger than that of the family in
1Like the White Lady in certain aristocratic families.
2Frazer (1910, 1, 45). See my discussion of sacri ﬁce below [p. 154 ﬀ.].totem and taboo 122our sense. The two do not coincide, since the totem is as a rule
inherited through the female line, and it is possible that paternaldescent may originally have been left entirely out of account.
The corresponding taboo restriction prohibits members of
the same totem clan from marrying or having sexual intercoursewith each other. Here we have the notorious and mysteriouscorrelate of totemism—exogamy. I have devoted the whole ofthe ﬁrst essay in the present volume to that subject, so that here I
need only repeat that it originates from the intensi ﬁcation
among savages of the horror of incest, that it would be fullyexplained as an assurance against incest under conditions ofgroup marriage, and that it is primarily aimed at restraining theyounger  generation from incest and that only as a later develop-
ment does it interfere with the older generation. [See above,pp. 4 and 9.]
To Frazer’s account of totemism—one of the earliest in the lit-
erature of the subject—I will add a few extracts from one of themost recent ones. In his Elemente der Völkerpsychologie , Wundt (1912,
116 ﬀ.) writes as follows: ‘The totem animal is also usually
regarded as the ancestral animal of the group in question.“Totem” is, on the one hand, a group name, and, on the other, aname indicative of ancestry. In the latter connection it has also amythological signi ﬁcance. These various ideas, however, inter-
play in numerous ways. Some of the meanings may recede, sothat totems have frequently become a mere nomenclature oftribal divisions, while at other times the idea of ancestry, or,perhaps also, the cult signi ﬁcance, predominates .... ’  The con-
cept of the totem has a decisive in ﬂuence upon tribal division
and tribal organization, which are subject to certain norms ofcustom. ‘These norms, and their ﬁxed place in the beliefs and
feelings of the tribal members, are connected with the fact thatoriginally, at all events, the totem animal was regarded, for themost part, as having not merely given its name to a group ofthe return of totemism in childhood 123tribal members but as having actually been its forefather ....
Bound up with this is the further fact that these animal ancestorspossessed a cult ....  Aside from speci ﬁc ceremonies and cere-
monial festivals, this animal cult originally found expressionprimarily in the relations maintained towards the totem animal.It was not merely a particular animal that was to a certain extentheld sacred, but every representative of the species. The totemmembers were forbidden to eat the ﬂesh of the totem animal, or
were allowed to do so only under speci ﬁc conditions. A
signiﬁcant counter-phenomenon, not irreconcilable with this, is
the fact that on certain occasions the eating of the totem ﬂesh
constituted a sort of ceremony .... ’
‘. . . The most important social aspect of this totemic tribal
organization, however, consists in the fact that it involved certainnorms of custom regulating the intercourse of the separategroups with one another. Of these norms, those governingmarriage relations were of ﬁrst importance. The tribal
organization of this period was bound up with an importantinstitution, exogamy , which originated in the totemic age.’ [English
translation, 116 f.]
If we seek to penetrate to the original nature of totemism, with-
out regard to subsequent accretions or attenuations, we ﬁnd that
its essential characteristics are these: Originally, all totems wereanimals, and were regarded as the ancestors of the di ﬀerent
clans. Totems were inherited only through the female line. Therewas a prohibition against killing the totem (or—which, underprimitive conditions, is the same thing—against eating it).Members of a totem clan were forbidden to practise sexualintercourse with one another.
1
1[The last three sentences are printed in spaced type in the original.] The
picture of totemism given by Frazer in his second work on the subject (‘TheOrigin of Totemism’, published in the Fortnightly Review  in 1899) agrees withtotem and taboo
124We shall now, perhaps, be struck by the fact that in Reinach’s
Code du totémisme  one of the two principal taboos, that of exogamy,
is not mentioned at all, while the belief upon which the secondone is founded, namely descent from the totem animal, is onlyreferred to in passing. My reason, however, for selecting theaccount given by Reinach (a writer, incidentally) who has madevery valuable contributions to the subject) was to prepare us forthe di ﬀerences of opinion between the authorities—di ﬀerences
into which we must now enter.
(2)
The more incontestable became the conclusion that totemism
constitutes a regular phase in all cultures, the more urgentbecame the need for arriving at an understanding of it and forthrowing light upon the puzzle of its essential nature. Everythingconnected with totemism seems to be puzzling: the decisiveproblems concern the origin of the idea of descent from thetotem and the reasons for exogamy (or rather for the taboo uponincest of which exogamy is the expression), as well as the rela-tion between these two institutions, totemic organization andprohibition of incest. Any satisfactory explanation should be atonce an historical and a psychological one. It should tell us
what I have written above: ‘Thus, Totemism has commonly been treated as a
primitive system both of religion and of society. As a system of religion itembraces the mystic union of the savage with his totem; as a system of societyit comprises the relations in which men and women of the same totem stand toeach other and to the members of other totemic groups. And correspondingto these two sides of the system are two rough and ready tests or canonsof Totemism: ﬁrst, the rule that a man may not kill or eat his totem animal or
plant; and second, the rule that he may not marry or cohabit with a woman ofthe same totem.’ [Reprinted in Frazer, 1910, 1, 101.] Frazer then proceeds
(thus plunging us into the middle of the controversies on totemism): ‘Whetherthe two sides—the religious and the social—have always co-existed or areessentially independent, is a question which has been variously answered.’the return of totemism in childhood
125under what conditions this peculiar institution developed and to
what psychical needs in men it has given expression.
My readers will, I am sure, be astonished to hear of the variety
of angles from which attempts have been made to answer thesequestions, and of the wide divergences of opinion upon themput forward by the experts. Almost any generalization that couldbe made on the subject of totemism and exogamy seems open toquestion. Even the account that I have just given, derived fromthe book published by Frazer in 1887, is open to the criticismthat it expresses the present writer’s arbitrary preferences; andindeed it would be contested to-day by Frazer himself; who hasrepeatedly changed his opinions on the subject.
1
It is plausible to suppose that an understanding of the essential
nature of totemism and exogamy would best be arrived at, if itwere possible to come nearer to the origins of the two institu-tions. But in this connection we must bear in mind AndrewLang’s warning that even primitive peoples have not retained theoriginal forms of those institutions nor the conditions whichgave rise to them; so that we have nothing whatever but hypoth-eses to fall back upon as a substitute for the observations whichwe are without.
2 Some of the attempted explanations seem, in
the judgment of a psychologist, inadequate at the very outset:they are too rational and take no account of the emotionalcharacter of the matters to be explained. Others are based on
1He makes the following admirable comment upon such changes of opinion:
‘That my conclusions on these di ﬃcult questions are ﬁnal, I am not so foolish
as to pretend. I have changed my views repeatedly, and I am resolved to changethem again with every change of the evidence, for like a chameleon the candidinquirer should shift his colours with the shifting colours of the ground hetreads.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, xiii.)
2By the nature of the case, as the origin of totemism lies far beyond our
powers of historical examination or of experiment, we must have recourse asregards this matter to conjecture.’ (Lang, 1905, 27.) ‘Nowhere do we see
absolutely primitive  man, and a totemic system in the making.’ (Ibid., 29.)totem and taboo
126assumptions which are uncon ﬁrmed by observation. Yet others
rely upon material which would be better interpreted in anotherway. There is generally little di ﬃculty in refuting the various
views put forward: the authorities are as usual more e ﬀective in
their criticisms of one another’s work than in their own produc-tions. The conclusion upon most of the points raised must be anon liquet . It is not surprising, therefore, that in the most recent
literature on the subject (which is for the most part passed overin the present work) an unmistakable tendency emerges to rejectany general solution of totemic problems as impracticable. (See,for instance, Goldenweiser, 1910.) In the discussion ofthese con ﬂicting hypotheses which follows, I have ventured to
disregard their chronological sequence.
(a) The origin of totemism
The question of the origin of totemism may be put in another
way: how did it come about that primitive men called themselves(and their clans) after animals, plants and inanimate objects?
1
McLennan (1865 and 1869–70), the Scot who discovered
totemism and exogamy for the world of science, refrained frompublishing any opinion on the origin of totemism. According toAndrew Lang (1905, 34) he was at one time inclined to thinkthat it originated from the custom of tattooing. I propose todivide the published theories on the origin of totemism intothree groups—( α) the nominalist, ( β) the sociological and ( γ)
the psychological.
(/afii9825)Nominalist theories
My accounts of these theories will justify my having brought
them together under the title I have adopted.
1In the ﬁrst instance probably after animals only.the return of totemism in childhood 127Garcilasso de la Vega, a descendant of the Peruvian Incas, who
wrote a history of his people in the seventeenth century, seemsalready to have attributed the origin of what he knew of totemicphenomena to the need felt by clans to distinguish themselvesfrom one another by the use of names. (Lang, 1905, 34.) Hun-dreds of years later the same idea was again proposed. Keane[1899, 396]
1 regards totems as ‘heraldic badges’ by means of
which individuals, families and clans sought to distinguishthemselves from one another. The same idea is expressed oncemore by Max-Müller (1897 [ 1, 201]):
2 ‘A totem is a clan mark,
then a clan name, then the name of the ancestor of a clan, andlastly the name of something worshipped by a clan.’ JuliusPikler,
3 writing later, declares: ‘Mankind required both for
communities and for individuals a permanent name whichcould be ﬁxed in writing ....  Thus totemism did not arise from
the religious needs of men but from their practical, everydayneeds. The core of totemism, nomenclature, is a result of theprimitive technique of writing. In its nature a totem is like aneasily drawn pictograph. But when once savages bore the nameof an animal, they went on to form the idea of kinship with it.’
In the same way, Herbert Spencer (1870 and 1893, 331–346)
regards the giving of names as the decisive factor in the origin oftotemism. The personal characteristics of particular individuals,he argues, prompted the idea of calling them after animals, andin that way they acquired laudatory names or nicknames whichwere handed on to their descendants. As a result of the vaguenessand unintelligibility of primitive speech, later generationsinterpreted these names as evidence of descent from the actual
1Quoted by Lang [1903, ix. f.].
2Quoted by Lang [1905, 118].
3Pickler and Somló [1900]. These authors justly describe their attempted
explanation of the origin of totemism as ‘a contribution to the materialisttheory of history’.totem and taboo
128animals. Totemism would thus be shown to be a misunderstood
form of ancestor worship.
Lord Avebury (better known under his earlier name of Sir
John Lubbock) gives a very similar account of the origin oftotemism, though without insisting upon the element of mis-understanding. If, he says, we wish to explain animal-worship,we must not forget how often human names are borrowed fromanimals. The children and followers of a man who was called‘Bear’ or ‘Lion’ naturally turned his name into a clan-name.Thence it came about that the animal itself would come to beregarded ‘ ﬁrst with interest, then with respect and at length with
a sort of awe’. [Lubbock, 1870, 171.]
What would seem to be an incontrovertible objection to this
derivation of totem names from the names of individuals wasbrought forward by Fison.
1 He showed from conditions in Aus-
tralia that the totem is invariably ‘the badge of a group, not of anindividual’. But even if this were not so, and the totem wasoriginally the name of an individual, it could never—sincetotems are inherited through the female line—be transmitted tohis children.
Moreover, the theories which I have so far discussed are obvi-
ously inadequate. They might perhaps explain the fact that primi-tive peoples adopt animal names for their clans, but they couldnever explain the importance that has become attached to thisnomenclature—namely, the totemic system. The theory belong-ing to this group which most deserves attention is that proposedby Andrew Lang (1903 and 1905). He, too, regards the giving ofnames as the heart of the problem, but he introduces two inter-esting psychological factors and may thus claim to have led theway towards the ﬁnal solution of the enigma of totemism.
Andrew Lang regards it as initially a matter of indi ﬀerence
how clans obtained their animal names. It is only necessary to
1Fison and Howitt (1880, 165), quoted by Lang (1905 [141]).the return of totemism in childhood 129assume that they awoke one day to the consciousness that they
bore such names and could give no account of how this hadcome about. The origin of the names had been forgotten.
1 They
would then attempt to arrive at an explanation by speculating onthe subject; and, in view of their belief in the importance ofnames, they were bound to reach all the ideas contained in thetotemic system. Primitive races (as well as modern savages andeven our own children
2) do not, like us, regard names as some-
thing indi ﬀerent and conventional, but as signi ﬁcant and essen-
tial. A man’s name is a principal component of his personality,perhaps even a portion of his soul. The fact of a primitive manbearing the same name as an animal must lead him to assumethe existence of a mysterious and signi ﬁcant bond between him-
self and that particular species of animal. What other bond couldit be than one of blood relationship? Once the similarity ofnames had led to this conclusion, the blood taboo wouldimmediately involve all the totemic ordinances, includingexogamy. ‘No more than these three things—a group animalname of unknown origin; belief in a transcendental connectionbetween all bearers, human and bestial, of the same name; andbelief in the blood superstitions—was needed to give rise to allthe totemic creeds and practices, including exogamy.’ (Lang,1905, 125 f.)
Lang’s explanation falls into two parts. One part of it traces the
totemic system as a matter of psychological necessity from thefact of the totems having animal names—always presupposingthat the origin of these names had been forgotten. The secondpart of his theory goes on to try to explain how the names in factoriginated; as we shall see, it is of a very di ﬀerent character from
the ﬁrst part.
This second part of Lang’s theory di ﬀers in no essential way
1[This sentence is printed in spaced type by Freud.]
2See the discussion of taboo above, p. 63 ﬀ.totem and taboo 130from the other theories which I have called ‘nominalist’. The
practical necessity for di ﬀerentiation compelled the various clans
to adopt names, and they therefore acquiesced in the names bywhich each clan was called by another clan. This ‘naming fromwithout’ is the special feature of Lang’s construction. The factthat the names adopted in this way were borrowed from animalsneeds no special comment and there is no reason why theyshould have been regarded in primitive times as insulting orderisive. Moreover, Lang has adduced not a few instances fromlater historical times in which names that were originally givenin derision by outsiders have been accepted and willinglyadopted (e.g. ‘ Les Gueux ’, ‘Whigs’ and ‘Tories’). The hypothesis
that in the course of time the origin of these names was forgot-ten connects this part of Lang’s theory with the other part whichI have already discussed.
(/afii9826)Sociological theories
Reinach, who has been successful in tracing survivals of the
totemic system in the cults and usages of later periods but whohas always attached small importance to the factor of descentfrom the totem, remarks con ﬁdently in one passage that in his
opinion totemism is nothing more than ‘ une hypertrophie de l’instinct
social’. (Reinach, 1905–12, 1, 41.) A similar view seems to run
through the recent book by Durkheim (1912). The totem, heargues, is the visible representative of social religion among theraces concerned: it embodies the community, which is the trueobject of their worship.
Other writers have sought to ﬁnd a more precise basis for the
participation of the social instincts in the formation of totemicinstitutions. Thus Haddon (1902 [745])
1 supposes that each
primitive clan originally subsisted upon some one species of
1Quoted by Frazer (1910, 4, 50).the return of totemism in childhood 131animal or plant and perhaps traded in that particular article of
food and exchanged it with other clans. It would inevitably fol-low that this clan would be known to the others by the name ofthe animal which was of such importance to it. At the same timethe clan would be bound to become especially familiar with theanimal and develop a peculiar interest in it, though this wouldbe founded on no psychical motive other than the mostelementary and urgent of human needs, that is, on hunger.
Against this most ‘rational’ of all the theories of totemism it
has been objected that feeding conditions of this kind are neverfound among primitive races and have probably never existed.Savages are omnivorous, and the more so the lower their condi-tion. Nor is it easy to see how an exclusive diet such as this couldhave developed into an almost religious attitude to the totem,culminating in absolute abstention from the favourite food. [Cf.Frazer, 1910, 4, 51.]
The ﬁrst of the three theories on the origin of totemism
which Frazer himself has supported at di ﬀerent times was a
psychological one, and I shall deal with it later. His secondtheory, with which we are here concerned, took form underthe in ﬂuence of a momentous publication by two men who
had made researches among the natives of Central Australia.
Spencer and Gillen (1899) described a number of peculiar
observances, usages and beliefs found in a group of tribesknown as the Arunta nation; and Frazer agreed with their opin-ion that these peculiarities were to be regarded as features of aprimitive condition of things and might throw light upon theoriginal and true meaning of totemism.
The peculiarities found in the Arunta tribe (a portion of the
Arunta nation) are as follows:
(1) The Arunta are divided into totem clans, but the totem is
not hereditary but determined for each individual in amanner to be described presently.totem and taboo 132(2) The totem clans are not exogamous; but the restrictions
upon marriage are based upon a highly developed divisioninto marriage-classes, which have no connection with thetotem.
(3) The function of the totem clans lies in their performing a
ceremony which has as its aim the multiplication of theedible totem object by a characteristically magical method.(This ceremony is known as lntichiuma .)
(4) The Arunta have a peculiar theory of conception and
reincarnation. They believe that there are places scatteredover the country [‘totem centres’] at each of which the
spirits of the dead of some one totem await reincarnationand enter the body of any woman who passes by thespot. When a child is born, the mother reports at whichof these places she thinks it was conceived, and the child’stotem is determined accordingly. It is further believed thatthe spirits (both of the dead and of the reborn) areintimately associated with certain peculiar stoneamulets, known as churinga , which are found at these same
centres.
Two factors seem to have led Frazer to suppose that the obser-
vances among the Arunta constitute the oldest form of totem-ism. First, there was the existence of certain myths whichdeclared that the ancestors of the Arunta regularly ate their totemand always married women of their own totem. Secondly, therewas the apparent disregard of the sexual act in their theory ofconception. People who had not yet discovered that conceptionis the result of sexual intercourse might surely be regarded as themost backward and primitive of living men.
By focusing his judgment of totemism upon the intichiuma
ceremony, Frazer came all at once to see the totemic system in anentirely new light: as a purely practical organization for meetingthe most natural of human needs. (Cf. Haddon’s theory abovethe return of totemism in childhood 133[p. 131].)1 The system was simply an example upon a large scale
of ‘co-operative magic’. Primitive men set up what might bedescribed as a magical producers’ and consumers’ union. Eachtotem clan undertook the business of guaranteeing the plentifulsupply of one particular article of food. Where non-edibletotems were concerned (such as dangerous animals, or rain,wind, etc.) the duty of the totem clan lay in controlling thenatural force in question and in counteracting its injurious pos-sibilities. The achievements of each clan were to the advantage ofall the rest. Since each clan might eat none, or only very little, ofits own totem, it provided that valuable material for the otherclans and was itself provided in exchange with what they pro-
duced as their social totemic duty. In the light of the insightwhich he thus obtained from the intichiuma  ceremony, Frazer
came to believe that the prohibition against eating one’s owntotem had blinded people to the more important element in thesituation, namely the injunction to produce as much as possibleof an edible totem to meet the needs of other people.
Frazer accepted the Arunta tradition that each totem clan had
originally eaten its own totem without restriction. But it wasthen di ﬃcult to understand the next stage in development, at
which the clansmen became content with assuring a supply ofthe totem for others, while themselves renouncing its enjoymentalmost completely. He supposed that this restriction had arisen,not from any kind of religious deference, but perhaps fromobserving that animals never fed upon their own kind: to do somight imply a breach in their identi ﬁcation with their totem and
consequently reduce their power of controlling it. Or it might bethat by sparing the creatures they hoped to conciliate them.Frazer, however, makes no disguise of the di ﬃculties involved in
1‘There is nothing vague or mystical about it, nothing of that metaphysical
haze which some writers love to conjure up over the humble beginnings ofhuman speculation, but which is utterly foreign to the simple, sensuous andconcrete modes of thought of the savage.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, 117.)totem and taboo
134these explanations (1910, 1, 121 ﬀ.): nor does he venture to
suggest by what means the custom described in the Aruntamyths of marrying within the totem was transformed intoexogamy.
The theory based by Frazer on the intichiuma  ceremony stands
or falls with the assertion of the primitive character ofthe Arunta institutions. But in face of the objections raised byDurkheim
1 and Lang (1903 and 1905), that assertion appears
untenable. On the contrary, the Arunta seem to be the mosthighly developed of the Australian tribes and to represent a stageof totemism in dissolution rather than its beginnings. The mythswhich impressed Frazer so deeply because, in contrast to theconditions that rule to-day, they lay stress upon liberty to eat thetotem and to marry within the totem—these myths are easilyexplicable as wishful phantasies which, like the myth of aGolden Age, have been projected back into the past.
(/afii9828)Psychological theories
Frazer’s ﬁrst psychological theory, formed before he became
acquainted with Spencer and Gillen’s observations, was based onthe belief in an ‘external soul’.
2 The totem, according to this
view, represented a safe place of refuge in which the soul couldbe deposited and so escape the dangers which threatened it.When a primitive man had deposited his soul in his totem hehimself was invulnerable, and he naturally avoided doing anyinjury to the receptacle of his soul. Since, however, he did notknow in which particular individual of the animal species con-cerned his own soul was lodged, it was reasonable for him tospare the whole species.
1In L’année sociologique  (1898, 1902, 1905, etc.); see especially ‘Sur le totémisme’
(1902 [89 f.]).
2See Frazer: The Golden Bough , First Edition (1890), 2, 332 ﬀ. [Cf. also Frazer,
1910, 4, 52 ﬀ.]the return of totemism in childhood 135Frazer himself subsequently abandoned this theory that totem-
ism was derived from a belief in souls; and, after coming to knowof Spencer and Gillen’s observations, adopted the sociologicaltheory which I have already discussed. But he came to see himselfthat the motive from which that second theory derived totemismwas too ‘rational’ and that it implied a social organization whichwas too complicated to be described as primitive.
1 The magical
co-operative societies now seemed to him to be the fruit ratherthan the seed of totemism. He sought for some simpler factor,some primitive superstition behind these structures, to whichthe origin of totemism might be traced back. At last he found thisoriginal factor in the Arunta’s remarkable story of conception.
The Arunta, as I have already explained, eliminate the connec-
tion between the sexual act and conception. At the moment atwhich a woman feels she is a mother, a spirit, which has beenawaiting reincarnation in the nearest totem centre where thespirits of the dead collect, has entered her body. She will bearthis spirit as a child, and the child will have the same totem as allthe spirits waiting at that particular centre. This theory of con-ception cannot explain totemism, since it presupposes the exist-ence of totems. But let us go back a step further and suppose thatoriginally the woman believed that the animal, plant, stone orother object, with which her imagination was occupied at themoment when she ﬁrst felt she was a mother, actually made its
way into her and was later born in human form. In that case theidentity between a man and his totem would have a factual basisin his mother’s belief and all the remaining totem ordinances(with the exception of exogamy) would follow. A man wouldrefuse to eat this animal or plant because to do so would amount
1‘It is unlikely that a community of savages should deliberately parcel out the
realm of nature into provinces, assign each province to a particular band ofmagicians, and bid all the bands to work their magic and weave their spells forthe common good.’ (Frazer, 1910, 4, 57.)totem and taboo
136to eating himself. He would, however, have a reason for
occasionally partaking of his totem in a ceremonial manner,because in that way he might strengthen his identi ﬁcation with
the totem, which is the essence of totemism. Some observationsmade by Rivers [1909, 173 f.] upon the natives of the Banks’Islands
1 seemed to prove a direct identi ﬁcation of human beings
with their totem on the basis of a similar theory of conception.
Accordingly, the ultimate source of totemism would be the
savages’ ignorance of the process by which men and animalsreproduce their kind; and, in particular, ignorance of the partplayed by the male in fertilization. This ignorance must havebeen facilitated by the long interval between the act of fertiliza-tion and the birth of the child (or the ﬁrst perception of its
movements). Thus totemism would be a creation of the femi-nine rather than of the masculine mind: its roots would lie in‘the sick fancies of pregnant women’. ‘Anything indeed thatstruck a woman at that mysterious moment of her life when sheﬁrst knows herself to be a mother might easily be identi ﬁed by
her with the child in her womb. Such maternal fancies, sonatural and seemingly so universal, appear to be the root oftotemism.’ (Frazer, 1910, 4, 63.)
The main objection to this third of Frazer’s theories is the
same as has already been brought against the second or socio-logical one. The Arunta seem to be far removed from the begin-nings of totemism. Their denial of paternity does not appear torest upon primitive ignorance; in some respects they themselvesmake use of descent through the father. They seem to have sacri-ﬁced paternity for the sake of some sort of speculation designed
to honour the souls of their ancestors.
2 They have enlarged the
myth of the impregnation of a virgin by the spirit into a generaltheory of conception; but that is no reason why ignorance of the
1Quoted by Frazer (1910, 2, 89 ﬀ. and 4, 59).
2‘That belief is a philosophy far from primitive.’ (Lang, 1905, 192.)the return of totemism in childhood 137conditions governing fertilization should be imputed to them
any more than to the peoples of antiquity at the time of theorigin of the Christian myths.
Another psychological theory of the origin of totemism has
been advanced by a Dutchman, G. A. Wilken [1884, 997]. Itconnects totemism with the belief in the transmigration of souls.‘The animal in which the souls of the dead are thought by pre-ference to be incarnate becomes a kinsman, an ancestor, and assuch is revered.’
1 It seems more likely, however, that the belief
in transmigration was derived from totemism than vice versa.
Yet another theory of totemism is held by some eminent
American ethnologists, Franz Boas, C. Hill-Tout, and others. It isbased upon observations on North American Indian totemicclans and maintains that the totem was originally the guardianspirit of an ancestor, who acquired it in a dream and transmittedit to his descendants. We have already heard the di ﬃculties
which stand in the way of the view that totems are inheritedfrom single individuals [cf. p. 129]; but apart from this, theAustralian evidence lends no support to the theory that totemsare derived from guardian spirits. (Frazer, 1910, 4, 48 ﬀ.)
The last of the psychological theories, that put forward by
Wundt (1912, 190), is based upon two facts. ‘In the ﬁrst place,
the original totem, and the one which continues to remain mostcommon, is the animal; and, secondly, the earliest totem animalsare identical with soul animals.’ [English translation, 192.] Soulanimals (such as birds, snakes, lizards and mice) are appropriatereceptacles of souls which have left the body, on account of theirrapid movements or ﬂight through the air or of other qualities
likely to produce surprise or alarm. Totem animals are derivedfrom the transformations of the ‘breath-soul’ into animals. Thus,according to Wundt, totemism is directly connected with thebelief in spirits, that is to say with animism.
1Quoted by Frazer (1910, 4, 45 f.).totem and taboo 138(b) and (c) The origin of exogamy and its relation
to totemism
I have set out the di ﬀerent theories about totemism in some
detail. But even so, compression has been inevitable and I fearthat my account may have su ﬀered in consequence. In what
follows, however, I shall venture, for my readers’ sake, to be stillmore condensed. The discussions on the exogamy practised bytotemic peoples are, owing to the nature of the material withwhich they deal, particularly complicated and di ﬀuse—one
might even say confused. The purposes of the present workmake it possible for me to limit myself to tracing certain of themain lines of dispute, while referring those who wish to enterinto the subject more deeply to the specialized writings fromwhich I have so frequently quoted.
The attitude taken by an author on the problems of exogamy
must naturally depend to some extent on the position he hasadopted towards the various theories of totemism. Some of theexplanations of totemism exclude any connection withexogamy, so that the two institutions fall completely apart. Thuswe ﬁnd two opposing views: one which seeks to maintain the
original presumption that exogamy forms an inherent part ofthe totemic system, and the other which denies that there is anysuch connection and holds that the convergence between thesetwo features of the oldest cultures is a chance one. This latteropinion has been adopted without quali ﬁcation by Frazer in his
later works: ‘I must request the reader to bear constantly inmind’, he writes, ‘that the two institutions of totemism andexogamy are fundamentally distinct in origin and nature,though they have accidentally crossed and blended in manytribes.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, xii.) He gives an explicit warning that
the opposite view must be a source of endless di ﬃculties and
misunderstandings.
Other writers have, on the contrary, found a means ofthe return of totemism in childhood 139regarding exogamy as an inevitable consequence of the basic
principles of totemism. Durkheim (1898, 1902 and 1905) hasput forward the view that the taboo attached to totems wasbound to involve prohibition against practising sexual inter-course with a woman of the same totem. The totem is of thesame blood as the man and consequently the ban upon sheddingblood (in connection with de ﬂoration and menstruation) pro-
hibits him from sexual relations with a woman belonging to histotem.
1 Andrew Lang (1905, 125), who agrees with Durkheim
on this subject, believes that the prohibition against women ofthe same clan might operate even without any blood taboo. Thegeneral totem taboo (which, for instance, forbids a man tosit under his own totem tree) would, in Lang’s opinion, havebeen su ﬃcient. Incidentally, he complicates this with another
explanation of exogamy (see below [p. 146]) and omits toshow how the two explanations are related to each other.
As regards the chronological relations between the two
institutions, most of the authorities agree that totemism is theolder of them and that exogamy arose later.
2
Of the theories which seek to show that exogamy is
independent of totemism I shall only draw attention to a fewwhich throw light on the attitude of the di ﬀerent authors to the
problem of incest.
McLennan (1865) ingeniously inferred the existence of
exogamy from the vestiges of customs which seemed to indicatethe earlier practice of marriage by capture. He formed a hypoth-esis that in the earliest times it had been a general usage for mento obtain their wives from another group and that marriage witha woman of their own group gradually ‘came to be considered
1See the criticisms of Durkheim’s views by Frazer (1910, 4, 100 ﬀ.).
2See, for instance, Frazer (1910, 4, 75): ‘The totemic clan is a totally di ﬀerent
social organism from the exogamous clan, and we have good grounds forthinking that it is far older.’totem and taboo
140improper because it was unusual’ [ibid., 289]. He accounted for
the prevalence of exogamy by supposing that the practice ofkilling the majority of female children at birth had led to ascarcity of women in primitive societies. We are not here con-cerned with the question of how far these assumptions ofMcLennan’s are supported by the actual ﬁndings. What interests
us far more is the fact that his hypotheses fail to explain why themale members of a group should refuse themselves access tothe few remaining women of their own blood—the fact thathe entirely overlooks the problem of incest. (Frazer, 1910, 4,
71–92.)
Other students of exogamy, on the contrary, and evidently
with greater justice, have seen in exogamy an institution for theprevention of incest.
1 When one considers the gradually
increasing complication of the Australian restrictions upon mar-riage, it is impossible not to accept the opinions of Morgan(1877), Frazer (1910, 4, 105 ﬀ.), Howitt [1904, 143] and
Baldwin Spencer that those regulations bear (in Frazer’s words)‘the impress of deliberate design’ and that they aimed at achiev-ing the result they have in fact achieved. ‘In no other way does itseem possible to explain in all its details a system at once socomplex and so regular.’ (Frazer, ibid., 106.)
It is interesting to observe that the ﬁrst restrictions produced
by the introduction of marriage classes a ﬀected the sexual free-
dom of the younger  generation (that is, incest between brothers
and sisters and between sons and mothers) whereas incestbetween fathers and daughters was only prevented by a furtherextension of the regulations.
But the fact that exogamous sexual restrictions were imposed
intentionally throws no light on the motive which led to theirimposition. What is the ultimate source of the horror of incestwhich must be recognized as the root of exogamy? To explain it
1Cf. the ﬁrst essay in this book.the return of totemism in childhood 141by the existence of an instinctive dislike of sexual intercourse
with blood relatives—that is to say, by an appeal to the fact thatthere is a horror of incest—is clearly unsatisfactory; for social
experience shows that, in spite of this supposed instinct, incest isno uncommon event even in our present-day society, and his-tory tells us of cases in which incestuous marriage betweenprivileged persons was actually the rule.
Westermarck (1906–8, 2, 368)
1 has explained the horror of
incest on the ground that ‘there is an innate aversion to sexualintercourse between persons living very closely together fromearly youth, and that, as such persons are in most cases related byblood, this feeling would naturally display itself in custom andlaw as a horror of intercourse between near kin’. Havelock Ellis[1914, 205 f.], though he disputed the instinctiveness of theaversion, subscribed to this explanation in the main: ‘The nor-mal failure of the pairing instinct to manifest itself in the case ofbrothers and sisters, or of boys and girls brought up togetherfrom infancy, is a merely negative phenomenon due to theinevitable absence in those circumstances of the conditionswhich evoke the pairing instinct ....  Between those who have
been brought up together from childhood all the sensory stimuliof vision, hearing and touch have been dulled by use, trained tothe calm level of a ﬀection, and deprived of their potency to
arouse the erethistic excitement which produces sexualtumescence.’
It seems to me very remarkable that Westermarck should con-
sider that this innate aversion to sexual intercourse with thosewith whom one has been intimate in childhood is also theequivalent in psychical terms of the biological fact that inbreed-ing is detrimental to the species. A biological instinct of the kindsuggested would scarcely have gone so far astray in its psycho-
1In the same chapter he replies to various objections which have been raised
against his views.totem and taboo 142logical expression that, instead of applying to blood-relatives
(intercourse with whom might be injurious to reproduction), itaﬀected persons who were totally innocuous in this respect,
merely because they shared a common home. I cannot resistreferring, too, to Frazer’s admirable criticism of Westermarck’stheory. Frazer ﬁnds it inexplicable that to-day there should be
scarcely any sexual aversion to intercourse with house-mates,whereas the horror of incest, which on Westermarck’s theory isonly a derivative of that aversion, should have increased soenormously. But some further comments of Frazer’s go deeper,and these I shall reproduce in full, since they are in essentialagreement with the arguments which I put forward in my essayon taboo:
‘It is not easy to see why any deep human instinct should need
to be reinforced by law. There is no law commanding men to eatand drink or forbidding them to put their hands in the ﬁre. Men
eat and drink and keep their hands out of the ﬁre instinctively for
fear of natural not legal penalties, which would be entailed byviolence done to these instincts. The law only forbids men to dowhat their instincts incline them to do; what nature itselfprohibits and punishes, it would be super ﬂuous for the law to
prohibit and punish. Accordingly we may always safely assumethat crimes forbidden by law are crimes which many men havea natural propensity to commit. If there was no such propensitythere would be no such crimes, and if no such crimes werecommitted what need to forbid them? Instead of assuming,therefore, from the legal prohibition of incest that there is anatural aversion to incest, we ought rather to assume that there isa natural instinct in favour of it, and that if the law represses it, asit represses other natural instincts, it does so because civilizedmen have come to the conclusion that the satisfaction of thesenatural instincts is detrimental to the general interests ofsociety.’ (Frazer, 1910, 4, 97 f.)
I may add to these excellent arguments of Frazer’s that thethe return of totemism in childhood 143ﬁndings of psycho-analysis make the hypothesis of an innate
aversion to incestuous intercourse totally untenable. They haveshown, on the contrary, that the earliest sexual excitations ofyouthful human beings are invariably of an incestuous characterand that such impulses when repressed play a part that canscarcely be over-estimated as motive forces of neuroses in laterlife.
Thus the view which explains the horror of incest as an innate
instinct must be abandoned. Nor can anything more favourablebe said of another, widely held explanation of the law againstincest, according to which primitive peoples noticed at anearly date the dangers with which their race was threatenedby inbreeding and for that reason deliberately adopted theprohibition. There are a host of objections to this theory. (Cf.Durkheim, 1898 [33 ﬀ.].) Not only must the prohibition
against incest be older than any domestication of animalswhich might have enabled men to observe the e ﬀects of in-
breeding upon racial characters, but even to-day the detrimen-tal results of inbreeding are not established with certainty andcannot easily be demonstrated in man. Moreover, everything thatwe know of contemporary savages makes it highly im-probable that their most remote ancestors were alreadyconcerned with the question of preserving their later progenyfrom injury. Indeed it is almost absurd to attribute to suchimprovident creatures motives of hygiene and eugenics to whichconsideration is scarcely paid in our own present-daycivilization.
1
Lastly, account must be taken of the fact that a prohibition
against inbreeding, based upon practical motives of hygiene, onthe ground of its tending to racial enfeeblement, seems quiteinadequate to explain the profound abhorrence shown towards
1Darwin [1875, 2, 127] writes of savages that they ‘are not likely to re ﬂect on
distant evils to their progeny’.totem and taboo 144incest in our society. As I have shown elsewhere,1 this feeling
seems to be even more active and intense among contemporaryprimitive peoples than among civilized ones.
It might have been expected that here again we should have
before us a choice between sociological, biological and psycho-logical explanations. (In this connection the psychologicalmotives should perhaps be regarded as representing biologicalforces.) Nevertheless, at the end of our inquiry, we can onlysubscribe to Frazer’s resigned conclusion. We are ignorant of theorigin of the horror of incest and cannot even tell in what direc-tion to look for it. None of the solutions of the enigma that havebeen proposed seems satisfactory.
2
I must, however, mention one other attempt at solving it. It isof a kind quite di ﬀerent from any that we have so far considered,
and might be described as ‘historical’.
This attempt is based upon an hypothesis of Charles Darwin’s
upon the social state of primitive men. Darwin deduced fromthe habits of the higher apes that men, too, originally lived incomparatively small groups or hordes
3 within which the jeal-
ousy of the oldest and strongest male prevented sexual promis-cuity. ‘We may indeed conclude from what we know of thejealousy of all male quadrupeds, armed, as many of them are,with special weapons for battling with their rivals, thatpromiscuous intercourse in a state of nature is extremely
1See the ﬁrst essay in this volume [p. 10].
2‘Thus the ultimate origin of exogamy, and with it of the law of incest—since
exogamy was devised to prevent incest—remains a problem nearly as dark asever.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, 165.)
3‘ [Freud’s use, here and subsequently, of the word ‘horde’ may give rise to
confusion. In ordinary English usage ‘horde’ suggests a very large andunorganized mass of people. The present context makes it plain that Freud usesthe word to denote a more or less organized group of limited size—whatAtkinson terms ‘the cyclopean family’.]the return of totemism in childhood
145i m p r o b a b l e ....  Therefore, if we look far enough back in the
stream of time, judging from the social habits of man as he nowexists . . . the most probable view is that primæval man abori-ginally lived in small communities, each with as many wives ashe could support and obtain, whom he would have jealouslyguarded against all other men. Or he may have lived with severalwives by himself, like the Gorilla; for all the natives “agree thatbut one adult male is seen in a band; when the young malegrows up, a contest takes place for mastery, and the strongest, bykilling and driving out the others, establishes himself as the headof the community.” (Dr. Savage, in Boston Journal of Nat. Hist ., vol. v,
1845–7, p. 423.) The younger males, being thus expelled andwandering about, would, when at last successful in ﬁnding a
partner, prevent too close interbreeding within the limits of thesame family.’ (Darwin, 1871, 2, 362 f.)
Atkinson (1903) seems to have been the ﬁrst to realize that
the practical consequence of the conditions obtaining inDarwin’s primal horde must be exogamy for the young males.Each of them might, after being driven out, establish a similarhorde, in which the same prohibition upon sexual intercoursewould rule owing to its leader’s jealousy. In course of time thiswould produce what grew into a conscious law: ‘No sexual rela-tions between those who share a common home.’ After the estab-lishment of totemism this regulation would assume anotherform and would run: ‘No sexual relations within the totem.’
Andrew Lang (1905, 114 and 143) accepted this explanation
of exogamy. In the same volume, however, he supports the othertheory (held by Durkheim), according to which exogamy was aresultant of the totemic laws. [Cf. p. 139.] It is a little di ﬃcult to
bring these two points of view into harmony: according to theﬁrst theory exogamy would have originated before totemism,
while according to the second it would have been derived from it.
1
1‘If it be granted that exogamy existed in practice, on the lines of Mr. Darwin’s
theory, before the totem beliefs lent to the practice a sacred sanction, our task istotem and taboo 146(3)
Into this obscurity one single ray of light is thrown by psycho-
analytic observation.
There is a great deal of resemblance between the relations of
children and of primitive men towards animals. Children showno trace of the arrogance which urges adult civilized men todraw a hard-and-fast line between their own nature and that ofall other animals. Children have no scruples over allowing ani-mals to rank as their full equals. Uninhibited as they are in theavowal of their bodily needs, they no doubt feel themselvesmore akin to animals than to their elders, who may well be apuzzle to them.
Not infrequently, however, a strange rift occurs in the
excellent relations between children and animals. A child willsuddenly begin to be frightened of some particular species ofanimal and to avoid touching or seeing any individual of thatspecies. The clinical picture of an animal phobia emerges—avery common, and perhaps the earliest, form of psycho-neuroticillness occurring in childhood. As a rule the phobia is attachedto animals in which the child has hitherto shown a speciallylively interest and it has nothing to do with any particularindividual animal. There is no large choice of animals that maybecome objects of a phobia in the case of children living in
relatively easy. The ﬁrst practical rule would be that of the jealous Sire, “No
males to touch the females in my camp”, with expulsion of adolescent sons. In
eﬄux of time that rule, become habitual , would be, “No marriage within the local
group”. Next, let the local groups receive names, such as Emus, Crows, Opos-sums, Snipes, and the rule becomes, “No marriage within the local group ofanimal name; no Snipe to marry Snipe.” But, if the primal groups were notexogamous, they would become so, as soon as totemic myths and tabus weredeveloped out of the animal, vegetable, and other names of local groups.’(Lang, 1905, 143.) (The italics in the middle of this passage are mine.) In his lastdiscussion of this subject, moreover, Lang (1911 [404]) states that he has ‘aban-doned the idea that exogamy is a consequence of the general totemic taboo’.the return of totemism in childhood
147towns: horses, dogs, cats, less often birds, and with striking
frequency very small creatures such as beetles and butter ﬂies.
The senseless and immoderate fear shown in these phobias issometimes attached to animals only known to the child frompicture books and fairy tales. On a few rare occasions it is pos-sible to discover what has led to an unusual choice of this kind;and I have to thank Karl Abraham for telling me of a case inwhich the child himself explained that his fear of wasps was dueto their colour and stripes reminding him of tigers, which fromall accounts were beasts to be feared.
1
No detailed analytic examination has yet been made of chil-
dren’s animal phobias, though they would greatly repay study.This neglect has no doubt been due to the di ﬃculty of analysing
children of such a tender age. It cannot therefore be claimed thatwe know the general meaning of these disorders and I myself amof the opinion that this may not turn out to be of a uniformnature. But a few cases of phobias of this kind directed towardsthe larger animals have proved accessible to analysis and havethus yielded their secret to the investigator. It was the same inevery case: where the children concerned were boys, their fearrelated at bottom to their father and had merely been displacedon to the animal.
Everyone with psycho-analytic experience will no doubt have
come across cases of the sort and have derived the same impres-sion from them. Yet I can quote only a few detailed publicationson the subject. This paucity of literature is an accidental circum-stance and it must not be supposed that our conclusions arebased on a few scattered observations. I may mention, forinstance, a writer who has studied the neuroses of childhoodwith great understanding—Dr. M. Wul ﬀ, of Odessa.
2 In the
course of a case-history of a nine-year-old boy he reports that at
1[Subsequently published. (Abraham, 1914, 82; English translation, 228.)]
2[Later Dr. M. Woolf of Tel-Aviv.]totem and taboo 148the age of four the patient had su ﬀered from a dog-phobia.
‘When he saw a dog running past in the street, he would weepand call out: “Dear doggie, don’t bite me! I’ll be good!” By
“being good” he meant “not playing on the ﬁddle” ’—not mas-
turbating. (Wul ﬀ, 1912, 15.) ‘The boy’s dog-phobia’, the author
explains, ‘was in reality his fear of his father displaced on todogs; for his curious exclamation “Doggie, I’ll be good!”—thatis, “I won’t masturbate”—was directed to his father, who had
forbidden him to masturbate.’ Wul ﬀ adds a footnote which is in
complete agreement with my views and at the same time bearswitness to the frequent occurrence of such experiences: ‘Phobiasof this type (phobias of horses, dogs, cats, fowls and otherdomestic animals) are, in my opinion, at least as common inchildhood as pavor nocturnus ; and in analysis they almost invariably
turn out to be a displacement on to the animals of the child’sfear of one of his parents. I should not be prepared to maintainthat the same mechanism applies to the widespread phobias ofrats and mice.’ [Ibid., 16.]
I recently published (1909 a) an ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a
Five-Year-Old Boy’, the material of which was supplied to me bythe little patient’s father. The boy had a phobia of horses, and as aresult he refused to go out in the street. He expressed a fear thatthe horse would come into the room and bite him; and it turnedout that this must be the punishment for a wish that the horsemight fall down (that is, die). After the boy’s fear of his fatherhad been removed by reassurances, it became evident that hewas struggling against wishes which had as their subject the ideaof his father being absent (going away on a journey, dying). Heregarded his father (as he made all too clear) as a competitor forthe favours of his mother, towards whom the obscure foreshad-owings of his budding sexual wishes were aimed. Thus he wassituated in the typical attitude of a male child towards his parentsto which we have given the name of the ‘Œdipus complex’ and
which we regard in general as the nuclear complex of thethe return of totemism in childhood 149neuroses. The new fact that we have learnt from the analysis of
‘little Hans’—a fact with an important bearing upontotemism—is that in such circumstances children displace someof their feelings from their father on to an animal.
Analysis is able to trace the associative paths along which this
displacement passes—both the fortuitous paths and those with asigniﬁcant content. Analysis also enables us to discover the motives
for the displacement. The hatred of his father that arises in a boyfrom rivalry for his mother is not able to achieve uninhibitedsway over his mind; it has to contend against his old-establishedaﬀection and admiration for the very same person. The child
ﬁnds relief from the con ﬂict arising out of this double-sided,
this ambivalent emotional attitude towards his father by dis-placing his hostile and fearful feelings on to a substitute  for his
father. The displacement cannot, however, bring the con ﬂict to
an end, it cannot e ﬀect a clear-cut severance between the
aﬀectionate and the hostile feelings. On the contrary, the con ﬂict
is resumed in relation to the object on to which the displace-ment has been made: the ambivalence is extended to it. Therecould be no doubt that little Hans was not only frightened  o f
horses; he also approached them with admiration and interest.As soon as his anxiety began to diminish, he identi ﬁed himself
with the dreaded creature: he began to jump about like a horseand in his turn bit his father.
1 At another stage in the resolution
of his phobia he did not hesitate to identify his parents withsome other large animals.
2
It may fairly be said that in these children’s phobias some of
the features of totemism reappear, but reversed into their nega-tive. We are, however, indebted to Ferenczi (1913 a) for an inter-
esting history of a single case which can only be described as aninstance of positive  totemism in a child. It is true that in the case of
1Freud (1909 a [English translation, 194]).
2In his gira ﬀe phantasy (ibid., 179–82].totem and taboo 150little Árpád (the subject of Ferenczi’s report) his totemic inter-
ests did not arise in direct relation with his Œdipus complex buton the basis of its narcissistic precondition, the fear of castration.But any attentive reader of the story of little Hans will ﬁnd
abundant evidence that he, too, admired his father as possessinga big penis and feared him as threatening his own. The same partis played by the father alike in the Œdipus and the castrationcomplexes—the part of a dreaded enemy to the sexual interestsof childhood. The punishment which he threatens is castration,or its substitute, blinding.
1
When little Árpád was two and a half years old, he had once,
while he was on a summer holiday, tried to micturate into thefowl-house and a fowl had bitten or snapped at his penis. A yearlater, when he was back in the same place, he himself turned intoa fowl; his one interest was in the fowl-house and in what wenton there and he abandoned human speech in favour of cacklingand crowing. At the time at which the observation was made(when he was ﬁve years old) he had recovered his speech, but
his interests and his talk were entirely concerned with chickensand other kinds of poultry. They were his only toys and he onlysang songs that had some mention of fowls in them. His attitudetowards his totem animal was superlatively ambivalent: heshowed both hatred and love to an extravagant degree. Hisfavourite game was playing slaughtering fowls. ‘The slaughter-ing of poultry was a regular festival for him. He would danceround the animals’ bodies for hours at a time in a state of intenseexcitement.’
2 But afterwards he would kiss and stroke the
slaughtered animal or would clean and caress the toy fowls thathe had himself ill-treated.
1For the substitution of blinding for castration—a substitution that occurs,
too, in the myth of Œdipus—see Reitler (1913), Ferenczi (1913 b), Rank
(1913) and Eder (1913).
2[Ferenczi, 1913 a (English translation, 246.)]the return of totemism in childhood 151Little Árpád himself saw to it that the meaning of his strange
behaviour should not remain hidden. From time to time hetranslated his wishes from the totemic language into that ofeveryday life. ‘My father’s the cock’, he said on one occasion,and another time: ‘Now I’m small, now I’m a chicken. When I
get bigger I’ll be a fowl. When I’m bigger still I’ll be a cock.’ Onanother occasion he suddenly said he would like to eat some‘fricassee of mother’ (on the analogy of fricassee of chicken).[Ibid., 249.] He was very generous in threatening other peoplewith castration, just as he himself had been threatened with it forhis masturbatory activities.
There was no doubt, according to Ferenczi, as to the sources
of Árpád’s interest in events in the poultry-yard: ‘the continual
sexual activity between the cock and hens, the laying of eggs andthe hatching out of the young brood’ grati ﬁed his sexual curios-
ity, the real object of which was human  family-life. [Ibid., 250.]
He showed that he had formed his own choice of sexual objectson the model of life in the hen-run, for he said one day to theneighbour’s wife: ‘I’ll marry you and your sister and my threecousins and the cook; no, not the cook, I’ll marry my motherinstead.’ [Ibid., 252.]
Later on we shall be able to assess the worth of this observa-
tion more completely. At the moment I will only emphasize twofeatures in it which o ﬀer valuable points of agreement with
totemism: the boy’s complete identi ﬁcation with his totem ani-
mal
1 and his ambivalent emotional attitude to it. These observa-
tions justify us, in my opinion, in substituting the father for thetotem animal in the formula for totemism (in the case of males).It will be observed that there is nothing new or particularlydaring in this step forward. Indeed, primitive men say the verysame thing themselves, and, where the totemic system is still in
1This, according to Frazer (1910, 4, 5), constitutes ‘the whole essence of
totemism’: ‘totemism is an identi ﬁcation of a man with his totem.’totem and taboo 152force to-day, they describe the totem as their common ancestor
and primal father. All we have done is to take at its literal value anexpression used by these people, of which the anthropologistshave been able to make very little and which they have thereforebeen glad to keep in the background. Psycho-analysis, on thecontrary, leads us to put special stress upon this same point andto take it as the starting-point of our attempt at explainingtotemism.
1
The ﬁrst consequence of our substitution is most remarkable.
If the totem animal is the father, then the two principal ordin-ances of totemism, the two taboo prohibitions which constituteits core—not to kill the totem and not to have sexual relationswith a woman of the same totem—coincide in their contentwith the two crimes of Œdipus, who killed his father and mar-ried his mother, as well as with the two primal wishes of chil-dren, the insu ﬃcient repression or the re-awakening of which
forms the nucleus of perhaps every psychoneurosis. If this equa-tion is anything more than a misleading trick of chance, it mustenable us to throw a light upon the origin of totemism in theinconceivably remote past. In other words, it would enable us tomake it probable that the totemic system—like little Hans’s ani-mal phobia and little Árpád’s poultry perversion—was a productof the conditions involved in the Œdipus complex. In order topursue this possibility, we shall have, in the following pages, tostudy a feature of the totemic system (or, as we might say, of thetotemic religion) which I have hitherto scarcely found anopportunity of mentioning.
1I have to thank Otto Rank for bringing to my notice a dog-phobia in an
intelligent young man. His explanation of the way in which he acquired hisillness sounds markedly like the totemic theory of the Arunta which I men-tioned on page 133: he thought he had heard from his father that his motherhad had a severe fright from a dog during her pregnancy.the return of totemism in childhood
153(4)
William Robertson Smith, who died in 1894—physicist,
philologist, Bible critic and archæologist—was a man of many-sided interests, clear-sighted and liberal-minded. In his book onthe Religion of the Semites  (ﬁrst published in 1889)
1 he put forward
the hypothesis that a peculiar ceremony known as the ‘totemmeal’ had from the very ﬁrst formed an integral part of the
totemic system. At that time he had only a single piece of evi-dence in support of his theory: an account of a procedure of thekind dating from the ﬁfth century .. But by an analysis of the
nature of sacri ﬁce among the ancient Semites he was able to lend
his hypothesis a high degree of probability. Since sacri ﬁce
implies a divinity, it was a question of arguing back from acomparatively high phase of religious ritual to the lowest one,that is, to totemism.
I will now attempt to extract from Robertson Smith’s admir-
able work those of his statements on the origin and meaning ofthe ritual of sacri ﬁce which are of decisive interest for us. In
so doing I must omit all the details, often so fascinating, andneglect all the later developments. It is quite impossible for anepitome such as this to give my readers any notion of thelucidity and convincing force of the original.
Robertson Smith [1894, 214] explains that sacri ﬁce at the
altar was the essential feature in the ritual of ancient religions. Itplays the same part in all religions, so that its origin must betraced back to very general causes, operating everywhere in thesame manner. Sacri ﬁce—the sacred act par excellence  (sacriﬁcium,
ἱερουργία )—originally had a somewhat di ﬀerent meaning,
however, from its later one of making an o ﬀering to the deity in
order to propitiate him or gain his favour. (The non-religious
1[The second and revised edition, which is the one here quoted, appeared
posthumously in 1894.]totem and taboo 154usage of the word followed from this subsidiary sense of
‘renunciation’. [See below, p. 174.]) It can be shown that, tobegin with, sacri ﬁce was nothing other than ‘an act of fellow-
ship between the deity and his worshippers’. [Ibid., 224.]
The materials o ﬀered for sacri ﬁce were things that can be
eaten or drunk; men sacri ﬁced to their deity the things on which
they themselves lived: ﬂesh, cereals, fruit, wine and oil. Only in
the case of ﬂesh were there limitations and exceptions. The god
shared the animal sacri ﬁces with his worshippers, the vegetable
oﬀerings were for him alone. There is no doubt that animal
sacriﬁces were the older and were originally the only ones. Vege-
table sacri ﬁces arose from the o ﬀering of ﬁrst-fruits and were in
the nature of a tribute to the lord of the earth and of the land; butanimal sacri ﬁces are more ancient than agriculture. [Ibid., 222.]
Linguistic survivals make it certain that the portion of the
sacriﬁce allotted to the god was originally regarded as being
literally his food. As the nature of gods grew progressively lessmaterial, this conception became a stumbling-block. It wasavoided by assigning to the deity only the liquid part of the meal.
Later, the use of ﬁre, which caused the ﬂesh of the sacri ﬁce upon
the altar to rise in smoke, a ﬀorded a method of dealing with
human food more appropriate to the divine mature. [Ibid., 224,229.] The drink-o ﬀering consisted originally of the blood of the
animal victim. This was later replaced by wine. In ancient timeswine was regarded as ‘the blood of the grape’, and it has been so
described by modern poets. [Ibid., 230.]
The oldest form of sacri ﬁce, then, older than the use of ﬁre or
the knowledge of agriculture, was the sacri ﬁce of animals,
whose ﬂesh and blood were enjoyed in common by the god and
his worshippers. It was essential that each one of the participantsshould have his share of the meal.
A sacri ﬁce of this kind was a public ceremony, a festival cele-
brated by the whole clan. Religion in general was an a ﬀair of the
community and religious duty was a part of social obligation.the return of totemism in childhood 155Everywhere a sacri ﬁce involves a feast and a feast cannot be
celebrated without a sacri ﬁce. The sacri ﬁcial feast was an
occasion on which individuals rose joyously above their owninterests and stressed the mutual dependence existing betweenone another and their god. [Ibid., 255.]
The ethical force of the public sacri ﬁcial meal rested upon
very ancient ideas of the signi ﬁcance of eating and drinking
together. Eating and drinking with a man was a symbol and aconﬁrmation of fellowship and mutual social obligations. What
was directly  expressed by the sacri ﬁcial meal was only the fact that
the god and his worshippers were ‘commensals’,
1 but every
other point in their mutual relations was included in this. Cus-toms still in force among the Arabs of the desert show thatwhat is binding in a common meal is not a religious factor butthe act of eating itself. Anyone who has eaten the smallest mor-sel of food with one of these Bedouin or has swallowed amouthful of his milk need no longer fear him as an enemy butmay feel secure in his protection and help. Not, however, foran unlimited time; strictly speaking, only so long as thefood which has been eaten in common remains in the body.Such was the realistic view of the bond of union. It neededrepetition in order to be con ﬁrmed and made permanent. [Ibid.,
269–70.]
But why is this binding force attributed to eating and drinking
together? In primitive societies there was only one kind of bondwhich was absolute and inviolable—that of kinship. The solidar-ity of such a fellowship was complete. ‘A kin was a group ofpersons whose lives were so bound up together, in what must becalled a physical unity, that they could be treated as parts of onec o m m o n  l i f e ....  I n  a  case of homicide Arabian tribesmen do
not say, “The blood of M. or N. has been spilt”, naming the man;they say, “Our blood has been spilt”. In Hebrew the phrase by
1[I.e. that they sat at one table.]totem and taboo 156which one claims kinship is “I am your bone and your ﬂesh”. ’
Thus kinship implies participation in a common substance. It istherefore natural that it is not merely based on the fact that a manis a part of his mother’s substance, having been born of her andhaving been nourished by her milk, but that it can be acquiredand strengthened by food which a man eats later and with whichhis body is renewed. If a man shared a meal with his god he wasexpressing a conviction that they were of one substance; and hewould never share a meal with one whom he regarded as astranger. [Ibid., 273–5.]
The sacri ﬁcial meal, then, was originally a feast of kinsmen, in
accordance with the law that only kinsmen eat together. In ourown society the members of a family have their meals in com-mon; but the sacri ﬁcial meal bears no relation to the family.
Kinship is an older thing than family life, and in the most primi-tive societies known to us the family contained members ofmore than one kindred. The man married a woman of anotherclan and the children inherited their mother’s clan; so that therewas no communion of kin between the man and the othermembers of the family. In a family of such a kind there was nocommon meal. To this day, savages eat apart and alone and thereligious food prohibitions of totemism often make it impos-sible for them to eat in common with their wives and children.[Ibid., 277–8.]
Let us now turn to the sacri ﬁcial animal. As we have heard,
there is no gathering of a clan without an animal sacri ﬁce, nor—
and this now becomes signi ﬁcant—any slaughter of an animal
except upon these ceremonial occasions. While game and themilk of domestic animals might be consumed without anyqualms, religious scruples made it impossible to kill a domesticanimal for private purposes. [Ibid., 280, 281.] There cannot bethe slightest doubt, says Robertson Smith, that the slaughter of avictim was originally among the acts which ‘are illegal to anindividual, and can only be justi ﬁed when the whole clan sharesthe return of totemism in childhood 157the responsibility of the deed.1 So far as I know, there is only
one class of actions recognized by early nations to which thisdescription applies, viz. actions which involve an invasion of thesanctity of the tribal blood. In fact, a life which no single tribes-man is allowed to invade, and which can be sacri ﬁced only by
the consent and common action of the kin, stands on the samefooting with the life of the fellow-tribesman.’ The rule thatevery participant at the sacri ﬁcial meal must eat a share of the
ﬂesh of the victim has the same meaning as the provision that
the execution of a guilty tribesman must be carried out by thetribe as a whole. [Ibid., 284–5.] In other words, the sacri ﬁcial
animal was treated as a member of the tribe; the sacri ﬁcing
community, the god and the sacri ﬁcial animal were of the same
blood and members of one clan.
2
Robertson Smith brings forward copious evidence for identi-
fying the sacri ﬁcial animal with the primitive totem animal. In
later antiquity there were two classes of sacri ﬁce: one in which
the victims were domestic animals of the kinds habitually usedfor eating, and the other extraordinary sacri ﬁces of animals
which were unclean and whose consumption was forbidden.Investigation shows that these unclean animals were sacred ani-mals, that they were o ﬀered as sacri ﬁces to the gods to whom
they were sacred, that originally they were identical with thegods themselves, and that by means of the sacri ﬁce the worship-
pers in some way laid stress upon their blood kinship with theanimal and the god. [Ibid., 290–5.] But in still earlier times thisdistinction between ordinary and ‘mystic’ sacri ﬁces disappears.
Originally all [sacri ﬁcial] animals were sacred, their ﬂesh was
forbidden meat and might only be consumed on ceremonialoccasions and with the participation of the whole clan. Theslaughter of [such] an animal was equivalent to a shedding of
1[This sentence is printed in spaced type by Freud.]
2[The last clause is in spaced type in the original.)totem and taboo 158the tribal blood and could occur subject only to the same precau-
tions and the same insurances against incurring reproach. [Ibid.,312, 313.]
The domestication of animals and the introduction of cattle-
breeding seems everywhere to have brought to an end the strictand unadulterated totemism of primæval days.
1 But such sacred
character as remained to domestic animals under what had thenbecome ‘pastoral’ religion is obvious enough to allow us to inferits original totemic nature. Even in late classical times ritual pre-scribed in many places that the sacri ﬁcial priest must take to
ﬂight after performing the sacri ﬁce, as though to escape retribu-
tion. The idea that slaughtering oxen was a crime must at onetime have prevailed generally in Greece. At the Athenian festivalof Buphonia [‘ox-murder’] a regular trial was instituted after thesacriﬁce, and all the participants were called as witnesses. At the
end of it, it was agreed that the responsibility for the murdershould be placed upon the knife; and this was accordingly castinto the sea. [Smith, 1894, 304.]
In spite of the ban protecting the lives of sacred animals in
their quality of fellow-clansmen, a necessity arose for killing oneof them from time to time in solemn communion and for divid-ing its ﬂesh and blood among the members of the clan. The
compelling motive for this deed reveals the deepest meaning ofthe nature of sacri ﬁce. We have heard how in later times, when-
ever food is eaten in common, the participation in the samesubstance establishes a sacred bond between those who consumeit when it has entered their bodies. In ancient times this resultseems only to have been e ﬀected by participation in the sub-
stance of a sacrosanct  victim. The holy mystery of sacri ﬁcial death
‘is justi ﬁed by the consideration that only in this way can the
1‘The inference is that the domestication to which totemism inevitably leads
(when there are any animals capable of domestication) is fatal to totemism.’(Jevons, 1902, 120.)the return of totemism in childhood
159sacred cement be procured which creates or keeps alive a living
bond of union between the worshippers and their god’.1 (Ibid.,
313.)
This bond is nothing else than the life of the sacri ﬁcial animal,
which resides in its ﬂesh and in its blood and is distributed
among all the participants in the sacri ﬁcial meal. A notion of this
kind lies at the root of all the blood covenants by which menmade compacts with each other even at a late period of history.[Loc. cit.] This completely literal way of regarding blood-kinship as identity of substance makes it easy to understand thenecessity for renewing it from time to time by the physicalprocess of the sacri ﬁcial meal. [Ibid., 319.]
At this point I will interrupt my survey of Robertson Smith’s
line of thought and restate the gist of it in the most conciseterms. With the establishment of the idea of private propertysacriﬁce came to be looked upon as a gift to the deity, as a
transference of property from men to the god. But this interpre-tation left unexplained all the peculiarities of the ritual of sacri-ﬁce. In the earliest times the sacri ﬁcial animal had itself been
sacred and its life untouchable; it might only be killed if all themembers of the clan participated in the deed and shared theirguilt in the presence of the god, so that the sacred substancecould be yielded up and consumed by the clansmen and thusensure their identity with one another and with the deity. Thesacriﬁce was a sacrament and the sacri ﬁcial animal was itself a
member of the clan. It was in fact the ancient totem animal, theprimitive god himself, by the killing and consuming of whichthe clansmen renewed and assured their likeness to the god.
From this analysis of the nature of sacri ﬁce Robertson Smith
draws the conclusion that the periodic killing and eating of thetotem in times before the worship of anthropomorphic deities
2
1[This sentence is printed in spaced type by Freud.]
2[The last six words are in spaced type in the original.]totem and taboo 160had been an important element in totemic religion. [Ibid., 295.]
The ceremonial of a totem meal of this kind is, he suggests, to befound in a description of a sacri ﬁce of comparatively late date. St.
Nilus records a sacri ﬁcial ritual current among the Bedouin of
the Sinai Desert at the end of the fourth century .. The victim
of the sacri ﬁce, a camel, ‘is bound upon a rude altar of stones
piled together, and when the leader of the band has thrice led theworshippers round the altar in a solemn procession accom-panied with chants, he in ﬂicts the ﬁrst wound . . . and in all
haste drinks of the blood that gushes forth. Forthwith the wholecompany fall on the victim with their swords, hacking o ﬀ pieces
of the quivering ﬂesh and devouring them raw with such wild
haste, that in the short interval between the rise of the day star
1
which marked the hour for the service to begin, and the disap-pearance of its rays before the rising sun, the entire camel, bodyand bones, skin, blood and entrails, is wholly devoured.’ [Ibid.,338.] All the evidence goes to show that this barbaric ritual,which bears every sign of extreme antiquity, was no isolatedinstance but was everywhere the original form taken by totemicsacriﬁce, though later toned down in many di ﬀerent directions.
Many authorities have refused to attach importance to the
concept of the totem meal, because it was not supported by anydirect observation at the level of totemism. Robertson Smithhimself pointed to instances in which the sacramental signi ﬁ-
cance of the sacri ﬁce seemed to be assured: for instance, the
human sacri ﬁces of the Aztecs, and others which recall the cir-
cumstances of the totem meal—the sacri ﬁce of bears by the Bear
clan of the Ouataouak [Otawa] tribe in America and the bearfeast of the Aino in Japan. [Ibid., 295 n.] These and similar caseshave been reported in detail by Frazer in the Fifth Part of hisgreat work (1912, 2 [Chaps. X, XIII, XIV]). An American Indian
tribe in California, which worship a large bird of prey (a
1To which the sacri ﬁce was o ﬀered.the return of totemism in childhood 161buzzard), kill it once a year at a solemn festival, after which it is
mourned and its skin and feathers are preserved. [Ibid., 2, 170.]
The Zuni Indians of New Mexico behave in a similar way to theirsacred turtles. [Ibid., 2, 175.]
A feature has been observed in the intichiuma  ceremonies of the
Central Australian tribes which agrees admirably with RobertsonSmith’s conjectures. Each clan, when it is performing magic forthe multiplication of its totem (which it itself is normally pro-hibited from consuming), is obliged during the ceremony to eata small portion of its own totem before making it accessible tothe other clans. [Frazer, 1910, l, 110 ﬀ.] According to Frazer
(Ibid., 2, 590) the clearest example of a sacramental consump-
tion of an otherwise prohibited totem is to be found among theBini of West Africa in connection with their funeral ceremonies.
Accordingly, I propose that we should adopt Robertson
Smith’s hypothesis that the sacramental killing and communaleating of the totem animal, whose consumption was forbiddenon all other occasions, was an important feature of totemicreligion.
1
(5)
Let us call up the spectacle of a totem meal of the kind we have
been discussing, ampli ﬁed by a few probable features which we
have not yet been able to consider. The clan is celebrating theceremonial occasion by the cruel slaughter of its totem animaland is devouring it raw—blood, ﬂesh and bones. The clansmen
are there, dressed in the likeness of the totem and imitating it insound and movement, as though they are seeking to stress their
1I am not unaware of the objections to this theory of sacri ﬁce which have
been brought forward by various writers (such as Marillier [1898, 204 ﬀ.],
Hubert and Mauss [1899, 30 ﬀ.], etc.); but they have not diminished to any
important extent the impression produced by Robertson Smith’s hypothesis.totem and taboo 162identity with it. Each man is conscious that he is performing an
act forbidden to the individual and justi ﬁable only through the
participation of the whole clan; nor may anyone absent himselffrom the killing and the meal. When the deed is done, theslaughtered animal is lamented and bewailed. The mourning isobligatory, imposed by dread of a threatened retribution. AsRobertson Smith (1894, 412) remarks of an analogous occasion,its chief purpose is to disclaim responsibility for the killing.
But the mourning is followed by demonstrations of festive
rejoicing: every instinct is unfettered and there is licence forevery kind of grati ﬁcation. Here we have easy access to an under-
standing of the nature of festivals in general. A festival is a per-mitted, or rather an obligatory, excess, a solemn breach of aprohibition. It is not that men commit the excesses because theyare feeling happy as a result of some injunction they havereceived. It is rather that excess is of the essence of a festival; thefestive feeling is produced by the liberty to do what is as a ruleprohibited.
What are we to make, though, of the prelude to this festive
joy—the mourning over the death of the animal? If the clans-men rejoice over the killing of the totem—a normally forbiddenact—why do they mourn over it as well?
As we have seen, the clansmen acquire sanctity by consuming
the totem: they reinforce their identi ﬁcation with it and with
one another. Their festive feelings and all that follows from themmight well be explained by the fact that they have taken intothemselves the sacred life of which the substance of the totem isthe vehicle.
Psycho-analysis has revealed that the totem animal is in reality
a substitute for the father; and this tallies with the contradictoryfact that, though the killing of the animal is as a rule forbidden,yet its killing becomes a festive occasion—the fact that it is killedand yet mourned. The ambivalent emotional attitude, which tothis day characterizes the father-complex in our children andthe return of totemism in childhood 163which often persists into adult life, seems to extend to the totem
animal in its capacity as substitute for the father.
If, now, we bring together the psycho-analytic translation of
the totem with the fact of the totem meal and with Darwin’stheories of the earliest state of human society, the possibility of adeeper understanding emerges—a glimpse of a hypothesiswhich may seem fantastic but which o ﬀers the advantage of
establishing an unsuspected correlation between groups ofphenomena that have hitherto been disconnected.
There is, of course, no place for the beginnings of totemism in
Darwin’s primal horde. All that we ﬁnd there is a violent and
jealous father who keeps all the females for himself and drivesaway his sons as they grow up. This earliest state of society hasnever been an object of observation. The most primitive kind oforganization that we actually come across—and one that is inforce to this day in certain tribes—consists of bands of males;these bands are composed of members with equal rights and aresubject to the restrictions of the totemic system, includinginheritance through the mother. Can this form of organizationhave developed out of the other one? and if so along what lines?
If we call the celebration of the totem meal to our help, we
shall be able to ﬁnd an answer. One day
1 the brothers who had
been driven out came together, killed and devoured their fatherand so made an end of the patriarchal horde. United, they hadthe courage to do and succeeded in doing what would have beenimpossible for them individually. (Some cultural advance, per-haps, command over some new weapon, had given them a senseof superior strength.) Cannibal savages as they were, it goeswithout saying that they devoured their victim as well as killinghim. The violent primal father had doubtless been the feared and
1To avoid possible misunderstanding, I must ask the reader to take into
account the ﬁnal sentences of the following footnote as a corrective to this
description.totem and taboo 164envied model of each one of the company of brothers: and in the
act of devouring him they accomplished their identi ﬁcation with
him, and each one of them acquired a portion of his strength.The totem meal, which is perhaps mankind’s earliest festival,would thus be a repetition and a commemoration of this mem-orable and criminal deed, which was the beginning of so manythings—of social organization, of moral restrictions and ofreligion.
1
1This hypothesis, which has such a monstrous air, of the tyrannical father
being overwhelmed and killed by a combination of his exiled sons was alsoarrived at by Atkinson (1903, 220 f.) as a direct implication of the state ofaﬀairs in Darwin’s primal horde: ‘The patriarch had only one enemy whom he
should dread . . . a youthful band of brothers living together in forced celibacy,or at most in polyandrous relation with some single female captive. A horde asyet weak in their impubescence they are, but they would, when strength wasgained with time, inevitably wrench by combined attacks, renewed again andagain, both wife and life from the paternal tyrant.’ Atkinson, who incidentallypassed his whole life in New Caledonia and had unusual opportunities forstudying the natives, also pointed out that the conditions which Darwinassumed to prevail in the primal horde may easily be observed in herds of wildoxen and horses and regularly lead to the killing of the father of the herd.[Ibid., 222 f.] He further supposed that, after the father had been disposed of,the horde would be disintegrated by a bitter struggle between the victorioussons. Thus any new organization of society would be precluded: there wouldbe ‘an ever-recurring violent succession to the solitary paternal tyrant, by sonswhose parricidal hands were so soon again clenched in fratricidal strife.’ (Ibid.,
228.) Atkinson, who had no psycho-analytic hints to help him and who wasignorant of Robertson Smith’s studies, found a less violent transition from theprimal horde to the next social stage, at which numbers of males live togetherin a peaceable community. He believed that through the intervention of mater-nal love the sons—to begin with only the youngest, but later others as well—were allowed to remain with the horde, and that in return for this tolerationthe sons acknowledged their father’s sexual privilege by renouncing all claimto their mother and sisters. [Ibid., 231 ﬀ.]
Such is the highly remarkable theory put forward by Atkinson. In its essen-
tial feature it is in agreement with my own; but its divergence results in itsfailing to e ﬀect a correlation with many other issues.
The lack of precision in what I have written in the text above, its abbreviationthe return of totemism in childhood
165In order that these latter consequences may seem plausible,
leaving their premises on one side, we need only suppose thatthe tumultuous mob of brothers were ﬁlled with the same con-
tradictory feelings which we can see at work in the ambivalentfather-complexes of our children and of our neurotic patients.They hated their father, who presented such a formidable ob-stacle to their craving for power and their sexual desires; but theyloved and admired him too. After they had got rid of him, hadsatisﬁed their hatred and had put into e ﬀect their wish to iden-
tify themselves with him, the a ﬀection which had all this time
been pushed under was bound to make itself felt.
1 It did so in
the form of remorse. A sense of guilt made its appearance, whichin this instance coincided with the remorse felt by the wholegroup. The dead father became stronger than the living one hadbeen—for events took the course we so often see them follow inhuman a ﬀairs to this day. What had up to then been prevented
by his actual existence was thenceforward prohibited by the sonsthemselves, in accordance with the psychological procedure sofamiliar to us in psycho-analyses under the name of ‘deferredobedience’. They revoked their deed by forbidding the killing ofthe totem, the substitute for their father; and they renounced itsfruits by resigning their claim to the women who had now beenset free. They thus created out of their ﬁlial sense of guilt the two
fundamental taboos of totemism, which for that very reason
of the time factor and its compression of the whole subject-matter, may be
attributed to the reserve necessitated by the nature of the topic. It would be asfoolish to aim at exactitude in such questions as it would be unfair to insistupon certainty.
1This fresh emotional attitude must also have been assisted by the fact that
the deed cannot have given complete satisfaction to those who did it. Fromone point of view it had been done in vain. Not one of the sons had in factbeen able to put his original wish—of taking his father’s place—into e ﬀect.
And, as we know, failure is far more propitious for a moral reaction thansatisfaction.totem and taboo
166inevitably corresponded to the two repressed wishes of the
Œdipus complex. Whoever contravened those taboos becameguilty of the only two crimes with which primitive societyconcerned itself.
1
The two taboos of totemism with which human morality has
its beginning, are not on a par psychologically. The ﬁrst of them,
the law protecting the totem animal, is founded wholly on emo-tional motives: the father had actually been eliminated, and in noreal sense could the deed be undone. But the second rule, theprohibition of incest, has a powerful practical basis as well.Sexual desires do not unite men but divide them. Though thebrothers had banded together in order to overcome their father,they were all one another’s rivals in regard to the women. Eachof them would have wished, like his father, to have all thewomen to himself. The new organization would have collapsedin a struggle of all against all, for none of them was of such over-mastering strength as to be able to take on his father’s part withsuccess. Thus the brothers had no alternative, if they were to livetogether, but—not, perhaps, until they had passed through manydangerous crises—to institute the law against incest, by whichthey all alike renounced the women whom they desired andwho had been their chief motive for despatching their father. Inthis way they rescued the organization which had made themstrong—and which may have been based on homosexual feel-ings and acts, originating perhaps during the period of theirexpulsion from the horde. Here, too, may perhaps have been thegerm of the institution of matriarchy, described by Bachofen[1861], which was in turn replaced by the patriarchal organiza-tion of the family.
On the other hand, the claim of totemism to be regarded as a
1‘Murder and incest, or o ﬀences of a like kind against the sacred laws of
blood, are in primitive society the only crimes of which the community assuch takes cognizance.’ (Smith, 1894, 419.)the return of totemism in childhood
167ﬁrst attempt at a religion is based on the ﬁrst of these two
taboos—that upon taking the life of the totem animal. The ani-mal struck the sons as a natural and obvious substitute for theirfather; but the treatment of it which they found imposed onthemselves expressed more than the need to exhibit theirremorse. They could attempt, in their relation to this surrogatefather, to allay their burning sense of guilt, to bring about a kindof reconciliation with their father. The totemic system was, as itwere, a covenant with their father, in which he promised themeverything that a childish imagination may expect from afather—protection, care and indulgence—while on their sidethey undertook to respect his life, that is to say, not to repeat thedeed which had brought destruction on their real father. Totem-ism, moreover, contained an attempt at self-justi ﬁcation: ‘If our
father had treated us in the way the totem does, we should neverhave felt tempted to kill him.’ In this fashion totemism helped tosmooth things over and to make it possible to forget the event towhich it owed its origin.
Features were thus brought into existence which continued
thenceforward to have a determining in ﬂuence on the nature of
religion. Totemic religion arose from the ﬁlial sense of guilt, in
an attempt to allay that feeling and to appease the father bydeferred obedience to him. All later religions are seen to beattempts at solving the same problem. They vary according tothe stage of civilization at which they arise and according to themethods which they adopt; but all have the same end in viewand are reactions to the same great event with which civilizationbegan and which, since it occurred, has not allowed mankind amoment’s rest.
There is another feature which was already present in totem-
ism and which has been preserved unaltered in religion. Thetension of ambivalence was evidently too great for any contriv-ance to be able to counteract it; or it is possible that psycho-logical conditions in general are unfavourable to getting rid oftotem and taboo 168these antithetical emotions. However that may be, we ﬁnd that
the ambivalence implicit in the father-complex persists in totem-ism and in religions generally. Totemic religion not only com-prised expressions of remorse and attempts at atonement, it alsoserved as a remembrance of the triumph over the father. Satisfac-tion over that triumph led to the institution of the memorialfestival of the totem meal, in which the restrictions of deferredobedience no longer held. Thus it became a duty to repeat thecrime of parricide again and again in the sacri ﬁce of the totem
animal, whenever, as a result of the changing conditions of life,the cherished fruit of the crime—appropriation of the paternalattributes—threatened to disappear. We shall not be surprised toﬁnd that the element of ﬁlial rebelliousness also emerges, in the
1ater products of religion, often in the strangest disguises and
transformations.
Hitherto we have followed the developments of the aﬀectionate
current of feeling towards the father, transformed into remorse,as we ﬁnd them in religion and in moral ordinances (which are
not sharply distinguished in totemism). But we must not over-look the fact that it was in the main with the impulses that led toparricide that the victory lay. For a long time afterwards, thesocial fraternal feelings, which were the basis of the whole trans-formation, continued to exercise a profound in ﬂuence on the
development of society. They found expression in the sancti ﬁca-
tion of the blood tie, in the emphasis upon the solidarity of alllife within the same clan. In thus guaranteeing one another’slives, the brothers were declaring that no one of them must betreated by another as their father was treated by them all jointly.They were precluding the possibility of a repetition of theirfather’s fate. To the religiously based prohibition against killingthe totem was now added the socially based prohibition againstfratricide. It was not until long afterwards that the prohibitionceased to be limited to members of the clan and assumed thesimple form: ‘Thou shalt do no murder.’ The patriarchal hordethe return of totemism in childhood 169was replaced in the ﬁrst instance by the fraternal clan, whose
existence was assured by the blood tie. Society was now based oncomplicity in the common crime; religion was based on thesense of guilt and the remorse attaching to it; while morality wasbased partly on the exigencies of this society and partly on thepenance demanded by the sense of guilt.
Thus psycho-analysis, in contradiction to the more recent
views of the totemic system but in agreement with the earlierones, requires us to assume that totemism and exogamy wereintimately connected and had a simultaneous origin.
(6)
A great number of powerful motives restrain me from any
attempt at picturing the further development of religions fromtheir origin in totemism to their condition to-day. I will onlyfollow two threads whose course I can trace with especial clarityas they run through the pattern: the theme of the totemicsacriﬁce and the relation of son to father.
1
Robertson Smith has shown us that the ancient totem meal
recurs in the original form of sacri ﬁce. The meaning of the act is
the same: sancti ﬁcation through participation in a common
meal. The sense of guilt, which can only be allayed by the soli-darity of all the participants, also persists. What is new is the clandeity, in whose supposed presence the sacri ﬁce is performed,
who participates in the meal as though he were a clansman, andwith whom those who consume the meal become identi ﬁed.
How does the god come to be in a situation to which he wasoriginally a stranger?
The answer might be that in the meantime the concept of God
1Cf. the discussion by C. G. Jung (1912), which is governed by views di ﬀering
in certain respects from mine.totem and taboo 170had emerged—from some unknown source—and had taken
control of the whole of religious life; and that, like everythingelse that was to survive, the totem meal had been obliged to ﬁnd
a point of contact with the new system. The psycho-analysis ofindividual human beings, however, teaches us with quite specialinsistence that the god of each of them is formed in the likenessof his father, that his personal relation to God depends on hisrelation to his father in the ﬂesh and oscillates and changes along
with that relation, and that at bottom God is nothing other thanan exalted father. As in the case of totemism, psycho-analysisrecommends us to have faith in the believers who call God theirfather, just as the totem was called the tribal ancestor. If psycho-analysis deserves any attention, then—without prejudice to anyother sources or meanings of the concept of God, upon whichpsycho-analysis can throw no light—the paternal element inthat concept must be a most important one. But in that case thefather is represented twice over in the situation of primitivesacriﬁce: once as God and once as the totemic animal victim.
And, even granting the restricted number of explanations opento psycho-analysis, one must ask whether this is possible andwhat sense it can have.
We know that there are a multiplicity of relations between the
god and the sacred animal (the totem or the sacri ﬁcial victim).
(1) Each god usually has an animal (and quite often severalanimals) sacred to him. (2) In the case of certain specially sacredsacriﬁces—‘mystic’ sacri ﬁces—the victim was precisely the
animal sacred to the god (Smith, 1894 [290]). (3) The god wasoften worshipped in the shape of an animal (or, to look at it inanother way, animals were worshipped as gods) long after theage of totemism. (4) In myths the god often transforms himselfinto an animal, and frequently into the animal that is sacred tohim.
It therefore seems plausible to suppose that the god himself
was the totem animal, and that he developed out of it at a laterthe return of totemism in childhood 171stage of religious feeling. But we are relieved from the necessity
for further discussion by the consideration that the totem isnothing other than a surrogate of the father. Thus, while thetotem may be the ﬁrst form of father-surrogate, the god will be a
later one, in which the father has regained his human shape. Anew creation such as this, derived from what constitutes the rootof every form of religion—a longing for the father—might
occur if in the process of time some fundamental change hadtaken place in man’s relation to the father, and perhaps, too, inhis relation to animals.
Signs of the occurrence of changes of this kind may easily be
seen, even if we leave on one side the beginning of a mentalestrangement from animals and the disrupting of totemismowing to domestication. (See above, p. 158 f.) There was onefactor in the state of a ﬀairs produced by the elimination of the
father which was bound in the course of time to cause an enor-mous increase in the longing felt for him. Each single one of thebrothers who had banded together for the purpose of killingtheir father was inspired by a wish to become like him and hadgiven expression to it by incorporating parts of their father’ssurrogate in the totem meal. But, in consequence of the pressureexercised upon each participant by the fraternal clan as a whole,that wish could not be ful ﬁlled. For the future no one could or
might ever again attain the father’s supreme power, even thoughthat was what all of them had striven for. Thus after a long lapseof time their bitterness against their father, which had driventhem to their deed, grew less, and their longing for himincreased; and it became possible for an ideal to emerge whichembodied the unlimited power of the primal father againstwhom they had once fought as well as their readiness to submitto him. As a result of decisive cultural changes, the originaldemocratic equality that had prevailed among all the individualclansmen became untenable; and there developed at the sametime an inclination, based on veneration felt for particulartotem and taboo 172human individuals, to revive the ancient paternal ideal by
creating gods. The notion of a man becoming a god or of a goddying strikes us to-day as shockingly presumptuous; but even inclassical antiquity there was nothing revolting in it.
1 The ele-
vation of the father who had once been murdered into a godfrom whom the clan claimed descent was a far more seriousattempt at atonement than had been the ancient covenant withthe totem.
I cannot suggest at what point in this process of development
a place is to be found for the great mother-goddesses, who mayperhaps in general have preceded the father-gods. It seems cer-tain, however, that the change in attitude to the father was notrestricted to the sphere of religion but that it extended in aconsistent manner to that other side of human life which hadbeen a ﬀected by the father’s removal—to social organization.
With the introduction of father-deities a fatherless society grad-ually changed into one organized on a patriarchal basis. Thefamily was a restoration of the former primal horde and it gaveback to fathers a large portion of their former rights. There wereonce more fathers, but the social achievements of the fraternalclan had not been abandoned; and the gulf between the newfathers of a family and the unrestricted primal father of thehorde was wide enough to guarantee the continuance of thereligious craving, the persistence of an unappeased longing forthe father.
We see, then, that in the scene of sacri ﬁce before the god of
the clan the father is in fact represented twice over—as the god
and as the totemic animal victim. But in our attempts at
1‘To us moderns, for whom the breach which divides the human and the
divine has deepened into an impassable gulf; such mimicry may appearimpious, but it was otherwise with the ancients. To their thinking gods andmen were akin, for many families traced their descent from a divinity, and thedeiﬁcation of a man probably seemed as little extraordinary to them as the
canonization of a saint seems to a modern Catholic.’ (Frazer, 1911 a, 2, 177 f.)the return of totemism in childhood
173understanding this situation we must beware of interpretations
which seek to translate it in a two-dimensional fashion as thoughit were an allegory, and which in so doing forget its historicalstratiﬁcation. The two-fold presence of the father corresponds to
the two chronologically successive meanings of the scene. Theambivalent attitude towards the father has found a plastic expres-sion in it, and so, too, has the victory of the son’s a ﬀectionate
emotions over his hostile ones. The scene of the father’s van-quishment, of his greatest defeat, has become the stu ﬀ for the
representation of his supreme triumph. The importance which iseverywhere, without exception, ascribed to sacri ﬁce lies in the
fact that it o ﬀers satisfaction to the father for the outrage in ﬂicted
on him in the same act in which that deed is commemorated.
As time went on, the animal lost its sacred character and the
sacriﬁce lost its connection with the totem feast; it became a
simple o ﬀering to the deity, an act of renunciation in favour of
the god. God Himself had become so far exalted above mankindthat He could only be approached through an intermediary—the priest. At the same time divine kings made their appearancein the social structure and introduced the patriarchal system intothe state. It must be confessed that the revenge taken by thedeposed and restored father was a harsh one: the dominance ofauthority was at its climax. The subjugated sons made use of thenew situation in order to unburden themselves still further oftheir sense of guilt. They were no longer in any way responsiblefor the sacri ﬁce as it now was. It was God Himself who
demanded it and regulated it. This is the phase in which we ﬁnd
myths showing the god himself killing the animal which issacred to him and which is in fact himself. Here we have themost extreme denial of the great crime which was the beginningof society and of the sense of guilt. But there is a second mean-ing to this last picture of sacri ﬁce which is unmistakable. It
expresses satisfaction at the earlier father-surrogate having beenabandoned in favour of the superior concept of God. At thistotem and taboo 174point the psycho-analytic interpretation of the scene coincides
approximately with the allegorical, surface translation of it,which represents the god as overcoming the animal side of hisown nature.
1
Nevertheless it would be a mistake to suppose that the hostile
impulses inherent in the father-complex were completelysilenced during this period of revived paternal authority. On thecontrary, the ﬁrst phases of the dominance of the two new
father-surrogates—gods and kings—show the most energeticsigns of the ambivalence that remains a characteristic of religion.
In his great work, The Golden Bough , Frazer [1911 a, 2, Chap.
XVIII] puts forward the view that the earliest kings of the Latintribes were foreigners who played the part of a god and weresolemnly executed at a particular festival. The annual sacri ﬁce
(or, as a variant, self-sacri ﬁce) of a god seems to have been an
essential element in the Semitic religions. The ceremonials ofhuman sacri ﬁce, performed in the most di ﬀerent parts of the
inhabited globe, leave very little doubt that the victims met theirend as representatives of the deity; and these sacri ﬁcial rites can
be traced into late times, with an inanimate e ﬃgy or puppet
taking the place of the living human being. The theanthropicsacriﬁce of the god, into which it is unfortunately impossible for
me to enter here as fully as into animal sacri ﬁce, throws a search-
ing retrospective light upon the meaning of the older forms ofsacriﬁce. [Smith, 1894, 410 f.] It confesses, with a frankness that
1It is generally agreed that when, in mythologies, one generation of gods is
overcome by another, what is denoted is the historical replacement of onereligious system by a new one, whether as a result of foreign conquest orof psychological development. In the latter case myth approximates to whatSilberer [1909] has described as ‘functional phenomena’. [Cf. Freud, 1900,
English translation, 1932, 464 ﬀ.] The view maintained by Jung (1912) that the
god who kills the animal is a libidinal symbol implies a concept of libido otherthan that which has hitherto been employed and seems to me questionablefrom every point of view.the return of totemism in childhood
175could hardly be excelled, to the fact that the object of the act of
sacriﬁce has always been the same—namely what is now wor-
shipped as God, that is to say, the father. The problem of therelation between animal and human sacri ﬁce thus admits of a
simple solution. The original animal sacri ﬁce was already a sub-
stitute for a human sacri ﬁce—for the ceremonial killing of the
father; so that, when the father-surrogate once more resumed itshuman shape, the animal sacri ﬁce too could be changed back
into a human sacri ﬁce.
The memory of the ﬁrst great act of sacri ﬁce thus proved
indestructible, in spite of every e ﬀort to forget it; and at the very
point at which men sought to be at the farthest distance from themotives that led to it, its undistorted reproduction emerged inthe form of the sacri ﬁce of the god. I need not enlarge here upon
the developments of religious thought which, in the shape ofrationalizations, made this recurrence possible. Robertson Smith,who had no thought of our derivation of sacri ﬁce from the great
event in human prehistory, states that the ceremonies at thefestivals in which the ancient Semites celebrated the death of adeity ‘were currently interpreted as the commemoration of amythical tragedy’ [Ibid., 413]. ‘The mourning’, he declares, ‘is
not a spontaneous expression of sympathy with the divine tra-gedy, but obligatory and enforced by fear of supernatural anger.And a chief object of the mourners is to disclaim responsibilityfor the god’s death—a point which has already come before usin connection with theanthropic sacri ﬁces, such as the “ox-
murder at Athens”.’ (Ibid., 412.) It seems most probable thatthese ‘current interpretations’ were correct and that the feelingsof the celebrants were fully explained by the underlyingsituation.
Let us assume it to be a fact, then, that in the course of the later
development of religions the two driving factors, the son’s senseof guilt and the son’s rebelliousness, never became extinct.Whatever attempt was made at solving the religious problem,totem and taboo 176whatever kind of reconciliation was e ﬀected between these two
opposing mental forces, sooner or later broke down, under thecombined in ﬂuence, no doubt, of historical events, cultural
changes and internal psychical modi ﬁcations.
The son’s e ﬀorts to put himself in the place of the father-god
became ever more obvious. The introduction of agricultureincreased the son’s importance in the patriarchal family. He ven-tured upon new demonstrations of his incestuous libido, whichfound symbolic satisfaction in his cultivation of Mother Earth.Divine ﬁgures such as Attis, Adonis and Tammuz emerged,
spirits of vegetation and at the same time youthful divinitiesenjoying the favours of mother goddesses and committing incestwith their mother in de ﬁance of their father. But the sense of
guilt, which was not allayed by these creations, found expressionin myths which granted only short lives to these youthfulfavourites of the mother-goddesses and decreed their punish-ment by emasculation or by the wrath of the father in the formof an animal. Adonis was killed by a wild boar, the sacred animalof Aphrodite; Attis, beloved of Cybele, perished by castration.
1
The mourning for these gods and the rejoicings over their
1Fear of castration plays an extremely large part, in the case of the youthful
neurotics whom we come across, as an interference in their relations with theirfather. The illuminating instance reported by Ferenczi (1913 a) has shown us
how a little boy took as his totem the beast that had snapped at his little penis.[See page 151 f.] When our children come to hear of ritual circumcision, theyequate it with castration. The parallel in social psychology to this reaction bychildren has not yet been worked out, so far as I am aware. In primæval timesand in primitive races, where circumcision is so frequent, it is performed at theage of initiation into manhood and it is at that age that its signi ﬁcance is to be
found; it was only as a secondary development that it was shifted back to theearly years of life. It is of very great interest to ﬁnd that among primitive
peoples circumcision is combined with cutting the hair and knocking out teethor is replaced by them, and that our children, who cannot possibly have anyknowledge of this, in fact treat these two operations, in the anxiety with whichthey react to them, as equivalents of castration.the return of totemism in childhood
177resurrection passed over into the ritual of another son-deity who
was destined to lasting success.
When Christianity ﬁrst penetrated into the ancient world it
met with competition from the religion of Mithras and for atime it was doubtful which of the two deities would gain thevictory. In spite of the halo of light surrounding his form, theyouthful Persian god remains obscure to us. We may perhapsinfer from the sculptures of Mithras slaying a bull that he repre-sented a son who was alone in sacri ﬁcing his father and thus
redeemed his brothers from their burden of complicity in thedeed. There was an alternative method of allaying their guilt andthis was ﬁrst adopted by Christ. He sacri ﬁced his own life and so
redeemed the company of brothers from original sin.
The doctrine of original sin was of Orphic origin. It formed a
part of the mysteries, and spread from them to the schools ofphilosophy of ancient Greece. (Reinach, 1905–12, 2, 75 ﬀ.)
Mankind, it was said, were descended from the Titans, who hadkilled the young Dionysus-Zagreus and had torn him to pieces.The burden of this crime weighed on them. A fragment ofAnaximander relates how the unity of the world was broken bya primæval sin,
1 and that whatever issued from it must bear
the punishment. The tumultuous mobbing, the killing and thetearing in pieces by the Titans reminds us clearly enough ofthe totemic sacri ﬁce described by St. Nilus [Ibid., 2, 93]—as,
for the matter of that, do many other ancient myths, including,for instance, that of the death of Orpheus himself. Nevertheless,there is a disturbing di ﬀerence in the fact of the murder having
been committed on a youthful  god.
There can be no doubt that in the Christian myth the original
sin was one against God the Father. If, however, Christ redeemedmankind from the burden of original sin by the sacri ﬁce of his
own life, we are driven to conclude that the sin was a murder.
1‘Une sorte de péché proethnique ’ (Reinach, 1905–12, 2, 76).totem and taboo 178The law of talion, which is so deeply rooted in human feelings,
lays it down that a murder can only be expiated by the sacri ﬁce
of another life: self-sacri ﬁce points back to blood-guilt.1 And if
this sacri ﬁce of a life brought about atonement with God the
Father, the crime to be expiated can only have been the murderof the father.
In the Christian doctrine, therefore, men were acknowledging
in the most undisguised manner the guilty primæval deed, sincethey found the fullest atonement for it in the sacri ﬁce of this one
son. Atonement with the father was all the more complete sincethe sacri ﬁce was accompanied by a total renunciation of the
women on whose account the rebellion against the father wasstarted. But at that point the inexorable psychological law ofambivalence stepped in. The very deed in which the son o ﬀered
the greatest possible atonement to the father brought him at thesame time to the attainment of his wishes against  the father. He
himself became God, beside, or, more correctly, in place of, thefather. A son-religion displaced the father-religion. As a sign ofthis substitution the ancient totem meal was revived in the formof communion, in which the company of brothers consumedthe ﬂesh and blood of the son—no longer the father—obtained
sanctity thereby and identi ﬁed themselves with him. Thus we
can trace through the ages the identity of the totem meal withanimal sacri ﬁce, with theanthropic human sacri ﬁce and with the
Christian Eucharist, and we can recognize in all these rituals theeﬀect of the crime by which men were so deeply weighed down
but of which they must none the less feel so proud. The Chris-tian communion, however, is essentially a fresh eliminationof the father, a repetition of the guilty deed. We can see thefull justice of Frazer’s pronouncement that ‘the Christian
1We ﬁnd that impulses to suicide in a neurotic turn out regularly to be self-
punishments for wishes for someone else’s death.the return of totemism in childhood 179communion has absorbed within itself a sacrament which is
doubtless far older than Christianity’.1
(7)
An event such as the elimination of the primal father by the
company of his sons must inevitably have left ineradicable tracesin the history of humanity; and the less it itself was recollected,the more numerous must have been the substitutes to which itgave rise.
2 I shall resist the temptation of pointing out these
traces in mythology, where they are not hard to ﬁnd, and shall
turn in another direction and take up a suggestion made bySalomon Reinach in a most instructive essay on the death ofOrpheus.
3
In the history of Greek art we come upon a situation which
shows striking resemblances to the scene of the totem meal asidenti ﬁed by Robertson Smith, and not less profound di ﬀerences
from it. I have in mind the situation of the most ancient Greektragedy. A company of individuals, named and dressed alike,surrounded a single ﬁgure, all hanging upon his words and
deeds: they were the Chorus and the impersonator of the Hero.He was originally the only actor. Later, a second and third actorwere added, to play as counterpart to the Hero and as characters
1Frazer (1912, 2, 51). No one familiar with the literature of the subject will
imagine that the derivation of Christian communion from the totem meal is anidea originating from the author of the present essay.
2In Ariel’s words from The T empest :
‘Full fathom ﬁve thy father lies;
Of his bones are coral made;
Those are pearls that were his eyes:
Nothing of him that doth fade,
But doth su ﬀer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange.’
3‘La mort d’Orphée’, contained in the volume which I have so often quoted
(1905–12, 2, 100 ﬀ.).totem and taboo 180split o ﬀ from him; but the character of the Hero himself and his
relation to the Chorus remained unaltered. The Hero of tragedymust su ﬀer; to this day that remains the essence of a tragedy. He
had to bear the burden of what was known as ‘tragic guilt’; the
basis of that guilt is not always easy to ﬁnd, for in the light of our
everyday life it is often no guilt at all. As a rule it lay in rebellionagainst some divine or human authority; and the Chorusaccompanied the Hero with feelings of sympathy, sought tohold him back, to warn him and to sober him, and mournedover him when he had met with what was felt as the meritedpunishment for his rash undertaking.
But why had the Hero of tragedy to su ﬀer? and what was the
meaning of his ‘tragic guilt’? I will cut the discussion short and
give a quick reply. He had to su ﬀer because he was the primal
father, the Hero of the great primæval tragedy which was beingre-enacted with a tendentious twist; and the tragic guilt was theguilt which he had to take on himself in order to relieve theChorus from theirs. The scene upon the stage was derived fromthe historical scene through a process of systematic distortion—one might even say, as the product of a re ﬁned hypocrisy. In the
remote reality it had actually been the members of the Choruswho caused the Hero’s su ﬀering; now, however, they exhausted
themselves with sympathy and regret and it was the Hero him-self who was responsible for his own su ﬀerings. The crime
which was thrown on to his shoulders, presumptuousness andrebelliousness against a great authority, was precisely the crimefor which the members of the Chorus, the company ofbrothers, were responsible. Thus the tragic Hero became,though it might be against his will, the redeemer of theChorus.
In Greek tragedy the special subject-matter of the perform-
ance was the su ﬀerings of the divine goat, Dionysus, and the
lamentation of the goats who were his followers and whoidenti ﬁed themselves with him. That being so, it is easy tothe return of totemism in childhood 181understand how drama, which had become extinct, was kindled
into fresh life in the Middle Ages around the Passion of Christ.
At the conclusion, then, of this exceedingly condensed inquiry, I
should like to insist that its outcome shows that the beginningsof religion, morals, society and art converge in the Œdipus com-plex. This is in complete agreement with the psycho-analyticﬁnding that the same complex constitutes the nucleus of all
neuroses, so far as our present knowledge goes. It seems to me amost surprising discovery that the problems of social psycho-logy, too, should prove soluble on the basis of one single con-crete point—man’s relation to his father. It is even possible thatyet another psychological problem belongs in this same connec-tion. I have often had occasion to point out that emotionalambivalence in the proper sense of the term—that is, the simul-taneous existence of love and hate towards the same object—liesat the root of many important cultural institutions. We knownothing of the origin of this ambivalence. One possible assump-tion is that it is a fundamental phenomenon of our emotionallife. But it seems to me quite worth considering another possibil-ity, namely that originally it formed no part of our emotional lifebut was acquired by the human race in connection with theirfather-complex,
1 precisely where the psycho-analytic examina-
tion of modern individuals still ﬁnds it revealed at its strongest.2
1Or, more correctly, their parental complex.
2Since I am used to being misunderstood, I think it worth while to insist
explicitly that the derivations which I have proposed in these pages do not inthe least overlook the complexity of the phenomena under review. All that theyclaim is to have added a new factor to the sources, known or still unknown, ofreligion, morality and society—a factor based on a consideration of the impli-cations of psycho-analysis. I must leave to others the task of synthesizing theexplanation into a unity. It does, however, follow from the nature of the newcontribution that it could not play any other than a central part in such asynthesis, even though powerful emotional resistances might have to be over-come before its great importance was recognized.totem and taboo
182Before I bring my remarks to a close, however, I must ﬁnd
room to point out that, though my arguments have led to a highdegree of convergence upon a single comprehensive nexus ofideas, this fact cannot blind us to the uncertainties of my prem-ises or the di ﬃculties involved in my conclusions. I will only
mention two of the latter which may have forced themselves onthe notice of a number of my readers.
No one can have failed to observe, in the ﬁrst place, that I have
taken as the basis of my whole position the existence of a collec-tive mind, in which mental processes occur just as they do in themind of an individual. In particular, I have supposed that thesense of guilt for an action has persisted for many thousands ofyears and has remained operative in generations which can havehad no knowledge of that action. I have supposed that an emo-tional process, such as might have developed in generations ofsons who were ill-treated by their father, has extended to newgenerations which were exempt from such treatment for thevery reason that their father had been eliminated. It must beadmitted that these are grave di ﬃculties; and any explanation
that could avoid presumptions of such a kind would seem to bepreferable.
Further re ﬂection, however, will show that I am not alone in
the responsibility for this bold procedure. Without the assump-tion of a collective mind, which makes it possible to neglect theinterruptions of mental acts caused by the extinction of the indi-vidual, social psychology in general cannot exist. Unless psychi-cal processes were continued from one generation to another, ifeach generation were obliged to acquire its attitude to life anew,there would be no progress in this ﬁeld and next to no develop-
ment. This gives rise to two further questions: how much can weattribute to psychical continuity in the sequence of generations?and what are the ways and means employed by one generationin order to hand on its mental states to the next one? I shall notpretend that these problems are su ﬃciently explained or thatthe return of totemism in childhood 183direct communication and tradition—which are the ﬁrst things
that occur to one—are enough to account for the process. Socialpsychology shows very little interest, on the whole, in the man-ner in which the required continuity in the mental life of succes-sive generations is established. A part of the problem seems to bemet by the inheritance of psychical dispositions which, however,need to be given some sort of impetus in the life of the indi-vidual before they can be roused into actual operation. This maybe the meaning of the poet’s words:
‘Was du ererbt von deinen Vätern hast,
Erwirb es, um es zu besitzen.’
1
The problem would seem even more di ﬃcult if we had to
admit that mental impulses could be so completely suppressedas to leave no trace whatever behind them. But that is not thecase. Even the most ruthless suppression must leave room fordistorted surrogate impulses and for reactions resulting fromthem. If so, however, we may safely assume that no generation isable to conceal any of its more important mental processes fromits successor. For psycho-analysis has shown us that everyonepossesses in his unconscious mental activity an apparatus whichenables him to interpret other people’s reactions, that is, to undothe distortions which other people have imposed on the expres-sion of their feelings. An unconscious understanding such as thisof all the customs, ceremonies and dogmas left behind by theoriginal relation to the father may have made it possible for latergenerations to take over their heritage of emotion.
Another di ﬃculty might actually be brought forward from
psycho-analytic quarters. The earliest moral precepts and restric-tions in primitive society have been explained by us as reactions
1[Goethe, Faust, Part I: ‘What thou hast inherited from thy fathers, acquire it to
make it thine.’]totem and taboo 184to a deed which gave those who performed it the concept of
‘crime’. They felt remorse for the deed and decided that itshould never be repeated and that its performance should bringno advantage. This creative sense of guilt still persists among us.We ﬁnd it operating in an asocial manner in neurotics, and
producing new moral precepts and persistent restrictions, as anatonement for crimes that have been committed and as a precau-tion against the committing of new ones.
1 I f ,  h o w e v e r ,  w e
inquire among these neurotics to discover what were the deedswhich provoked these reactions, we shall be disappointed. Weﬁnd no deeds, but only impulses and emotions, set upon evil
ends but held back from their achievement. What lie behind thesense of guilt of neurotics are always psychical  realities and never
factual  ones. What characterizes neurotics is the fact that they
prefer psychical to factual reality and react just as seriously tothoughts as normal persons do to realities.
May not the same have been true of primitive men? We are
justiﬁed in believing that, as one of the phenomena of their
narcissistic organization, they overvalued their psychical acts toan extraordinary degree.
2 Accordingly the mere hostile impulse
against the father, the mere existence of a wishful phantasy  o f
killing and devouring him, would have been enough to producethe moral reaction that created totemism and taboo. In this waywe should avoid the necessity for deriving the origin of ourcultural legacy, of which we justly feel so proud, from a hideouscrime, revolting to all our feelings. No damage would thus bedone to the causal chain stretching from the beginning to thepresent day, for psychical reality would be strong enough to bearthe weight of these consequences. To this it may be objected thatan alteration in the form of society from a patriarchal horde toa fraternal clan did actually take place. This is a powerful
1Cf. the essay on taboo, the second in this volume [p. 78 ﬀ.].
2Cf. the third essay in this volume [p. 99].the return of totemism in childhood 185argument, but not a conclusive one. The alteration might have
been e ﬀected in a less violent fashion and none the less have
been capable of determining the appearance of the moral reac-tion. So long as the pressure exercised by the primal father couldbe felt, the hostile feelings towards him were justi ﬁed, and
remorse on their account would have to await a later day. And ifit is further argued that everything derived from the ambivalentrelation to the father—taboo and the sacri ﬁcial ordinance—is
characterized by the deepest seriousness and the most completereality, this further objection carries just as little weight. For theceremonials and inhibitions of obsessional neurotics show thesesame characteristics and are nevertheless derived only frompsychical reality—from intentions and not from their execution.We must avoid transplanting a contempt for what is merelythought or wished from our commonplace world, with itswealth of material values, into the world of primitive men andneurotics, of which the wealth lies only within themselves.
Here we are faced by a decision which is indeed no easy one.
First, however, it must be confessed that the distinction, whichmay seem fundamental to other people, does not in our judg-ment a ﬀect the heart of the matter. If wishes and impulses have
the full value of facts for primitive men, it is our business to givetheir attitude our understanding attention instead of correctingit in accordance with our own standards. Let us, then, examinemore closely the case of neurosis—comparison with which ledus into our present uncertainty. It is not accurate to say thatobsessional neurotics, weighed down under the burden of anexcessive morality, are defending themselves only againstpsychical  reality and are punishing themselves for impulses which
were merely felt. Historical  reality has a share in the matter as well.
In their childhood they had these evil impulses pure and simple,and turned them into acts so far as the impotence of childhoodallowed. Each of these excessively virtuous individuals passedthrough an evil period in his infancy—a phase of perversiontotem and taboo 186which was the forerunner and precondition of the later period
of excessive morality. The analogy between primitive men andneurotics will therefore be far more fully established if we sup-pose that in the former instance, too, psychical reality—as to theform taken by which we are in no doubt—coincided at thebeginning with factual reality: that primitive men actually did
what all the evidence shows that they intended to do.
Nor must we let ourselves be in ﬂuenced too far in our judg-
ment of primitive men by the analogy of neurotics. There aredistinctions, too, which must be borne in mind. It is no doubttrue that the sharp contrast that we make between thinking and
doing is absent in both of them. But neurotics are above allinhibited  in their actions: with them the thought is a complete
substitute for the deed. Primitive men, on the other hand, areuninhibited : thought passes directly into action. With them it is
rather the deed that is a substitute for the thought. And that iswhy, without laying claim to any ﬁnality of judgment, I think
that in the case before us it may safely be assumed that ‘in thebeginning was the Deed’.
1
1[‘Im Anfang war die T at ’ (Goethe, Faust, Part I).]the return of totemism in childhood 187LIST OF WORKS REFERRED TO IN THE TEXT
[Titles of books and periodicals are in italics; titles of papers are in inverted
commas. Abbreviations are in accordance with the World List of Scientiﬁc
Periodicals  (Oxford, 1934). Numerals in thick type refer to volumes; ordin-
ary numerals refer to pages. ‘ Trans .’ before an entry indicates that any
reference in the text is not to the original but to an English translation. G.S.
= Freud, Gesammelte Schriften  (12 vols.), Vienna, 1924–34. G.W.  = Freud,
Gesammelte Werke  (18 vols.), London, 1940–. C.P. = Freud, Collected Papers
(5 vols.), London, 1924–50.]
Abraham, K. (1912). ‘Über die determinierende Kraft des Namens’, Int. Z.
Psychoanal ., 2, 133.
Abraham, K. (1914). ‘Über Einschränkungen und Umwandlungen der
Schaulust bei den Psychoneurotikern’, Jb. Psychoanal ., 6, 25.
(Trans .: ‘Restrictions and Transformations of Scopophilia in Psycho-
Neurotics’, Selected Papers , 1927, 169.)
Abraham, K. (1927). Selected Papers , London.
Atkinson, J. J. (1903). Primal Law , London. (Included in Lang, A., Social
Origins .)
Avebury, Lord. See Lubbock, J.
Bachofen, J. J. (1861). Das Mutterrecht , Stuttgart.
Bastian, A. (1874–5). Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste  (2 vols.),
Jena.Batchelor, J. (1901). The Ainu and their Folk-Lore , London.
Blumentritt, F. (1891). ‘Über die Eingeborenen der Insel Palawan’, Globus ,
59, 181.
Boas, F. (1888). ‘The Central Eskimo’, Sixth Ann. Rep. Bur. Amer. Ethn ., 399.
Boas, F. (1890). ‘Second General Report on the Indians of British Colum-
bia’, Report of Sixtieth Meeting of the British Association , 562.
Brown, W. (1845). New Zealand and its Aborigines , London.
Cameron, A. L. P. (1885). ‘Notes on some Tribes of New South Wales’,
J. anthrop. Inst ., 14, 344.
Codrington, R. H. (1891). The Melanesians , Oxford.
Crawley, E. (1902). The Mystic Rose , London.
Darwin C. (1871). The Descent of Man  (2 vols.), London. (1875). The
Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication  (2 vols.), 2nd
ed., London.
Dobrizhoffer, M. (1784). Historia de Abiponibus  (3 vols.), Vienna.
Dorsey, J. O. (1884). ‘An Account of the War Customs of the Osages’,
Amer. Nat ., 18, 113.
Durkheim, E. (1898). ‘La prohibition de l’inceste et ses origines’, Année
sociolog ., 1, I.
Durkheim, E. (1902). ‘Sur le totémisme’, Année sociolog ., 5, 82.
Durkheim, E. (1905). ‘Sur l’organisation matrimoniale des sociétés aus-
traliennes’, Annee sociolog ., 8, 118.
Durkheim, E. (1912). Les formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse: Le système
totémique en Australie , Paris.
Eder, M. D. (1913). ‘Augenträume’, Int. Z. Psychoanal. 1, 157.
Ellis, Havelock (1914). Sexual Selection in Man (Studies in the Psychology of
Sex, IV), Philadelphia.
Ellis, W. (1832–6). Polynesian Researches , 2nd ed. (4 vols.), London.
Encyclopaedia Britannica  (1910–11). Eleventh Edition, Cambridge.
Ferenczi, S. (1913 a). ‘Ein kleiner Hahnemann’, Int. Z. Psychoanal ., 1, 240.
(Trans .: ‘A Little Chanticleer’, Contributions to Psycho-Analysis , 1916,
240.)
Ferenczi, S. (1913 b). ‘Zur Augensymbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal ., 1, 161.
(Trans .: ‘On Eye Symbolism’, Contributions to Psycho-Analysis , 1916,
270.)
Ferenczi, S. (1916). Contributions to Psycho-Analysis , Boston. [Later title-
page: Sex in Psycho-Analysis .]
Fison, L. (1885). ‘The Nanga’, J. anthrop. Inst ., 14, 14.
Fison, L., and Howitt, A. W. (1880). Kamilaroi and Kurnai , Melbourne.
Fraser, J. (1892). The Aborigines of New South Wales , Sydney.bibliography 189Fraser, J. G. (1910). Totemism and Exogamy  (4 vols.), London.
Fraser, J. G. (1911 a). The Magic Art  (2 vols.) ( The Golden Bough , 3rd ed., Part
I), London.
Fraser, J. G. (1911 b). Taboo and the Perils of the Soul (The Golden Bough , 3rd
ed., Part II), London.
Fraser, J. G. (1912). Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild  (2 vols.) ( The Golden
Bough , 3rd ed., Part V), London.
Fraser, J. G. (1914). Adonis, Attis, Osiris , 3rd ed. (2 vols.) ( The Golden Bough ,
3rd ed., Part IV), London.
Freud, S. (1900). Die Traumdeutung , Vienna. ( G.S., 2–3; G.W., 2–3.) (Trans.:
The Interpretation of Dreams , revised ed., London, 1932.)
Freud, S. (1905 a). Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie , Vienna. ( G.S., 5, I;
G. W ., 5, 29)
(Trans.: Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality , London, 1949.)
Freud, S. (1905 b). Der Witz und seine Beziehung zum Unbewussten,
Vienna. ( G.S., 9; G.W., 6.)
(Trans.: Wit and its Relation to the Unconscious , London, 1922.)
Freud, S. (1909 a). ‘Analyse der Phobie eines fünfjährigen Knaben’, G.S., 8,
127; G.W., 7, 243.
(Trans .: ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’, C.P., 3, 149.)
Freud, S. (1909 b). ‘Bemerkungen über einen Fall von Zwangsneurose’,
G.S., 8, 267; G.W., 7, 381.
(Trans .: ‘Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’, C.P., 3, 293.)
Freud, S. (1910). ‘ “Über den Gegensinn der Urworte” ’, G.S., 10, 221; G.W.,
8, 214.
(Trans.: ‘ “The Antithetical Sense of Primal Words” ’, C.P ., 4, 184.)
Freud, S. (1911 a). ‘Formulierungen über die zwei Principien des
psychischen Geschehens’, G.S., 5, 409; G.W., 8, 214.
(Trans .: ‘Formulations regarding the Two Principles in Mental
Functioning’, C.P., 4, 13.)
Freud, S. (1911 b). ‘Psychoanalytische Bemerkungen über einen auto-
biographisch beschriebenen Fall von Paranoia’, G.S., 8, 353; G.W., 8,
240.(Trans .: ‘Psycho-Analytic Notes upon an Autobiographical Account
of a Case of Paranoia’, C.P., 3, 387.)
Freud, S. (1912). ‘Einige Bemerkungen über den Begriff des Unbewussten
in der Psychoanalyse’, G.S., 5, 433; G.W., 8, 430.
(Trans .: ‘A Note on the Unconscious in Psycho-Analysis’, C.P., 4, 22.)
Freud, S. (1919). ‘Das Unheimliche’, G.S., 10, 369; G.W., 12, 236.
(Trans .: ‘The Uncanny’, C.P., 4, 368.)totem and taboo
190Freud, S. (1933). Neue Folge der Vorlesungen zur Einführung in die Psycho-
analyse , Vienna. ( G.S., 12, 149; G.W., 15, I.)
(Trans.: New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis , London, 1933.)
Goldenweiser, A. (1910). ‘Totemism, an Analytical Study’, J. Am. Folk-Lore ,
23, 179.
Gramberg, J. S. G. (1872). ‘Eene maand in de binnenlanden van Timor’,
Verh. batavia. Genoot ., 36, 161.
Guis, Le Père J. (1902). ‘Les Canaques’, Missions Catholiques , 34, 208.
Haddon, A. C. (1902). ‘Presidential Address to the Anthropological Sec-
tion’, Report of Seventy-Second Meeting of the British Association , 738.
Haeberlin, P. (1912). ‘Sexualgespenster’, Sexualprobleme , February.
Howitt, A. W. (1904). The Native Tribes of South-East Australia , London.
Hubert, H., and Mauss, M. (1899). ‘Essai sur la nature et la fonction du
sacriﬁce’, Année sociolog ., 2, 29.
Hubert, H. (1904). ‘Esquisse d’une théorie générale de la magie’, Année
sociolog ., 7, I.
Jevons, F. B. (1902). An Introduction to the History of Religion , 2nd ed.,
London. (1st ed., 1896.)
Joustra, M. (1902). ‘Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten der Bataks’, Meded.
ned. Zend ., 46, 385.
Jung, C. G. (1912). ‘Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido’, Jb. psychoanal.
psychopath. Forsch., 3, 120 and 4, 162.
(Trans.: Psychology of the Unconscious , London, 1919.)
Jung, C. G. (1913). ‘Versuch einer Darstellung der psychoanalytischen
Theorie’, Jb. psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch ., 5, 307.
(Trans.: The Theory of Psycho-Analysis , New York, 1915.)
Junod, H. A. (1898). Les Ba-Ronga , Neuchâtel.
Kaempfer, E. (1727). The History of Japan  (2 vols.), London.
Keane, A. H. (1899). Man, Past and Present , Cambridge.
Kleinpaul, R. (1898). Die Lebendigen und die Toten in Volksglauben, Religion
und Sage , Leipzig.
Labbé, P. (1903). Un bagne russe, l’île de Sakhaline , Paris.
Lambert, Le Père (1900). Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens ,
Nouméa.
Lang, A. (1903). Social Origins , London. (Includes Atkinson, J. J., Primal
Law.)
Lang, A. (1905). The Secret of the Totem , London.
Lang, A. (1910–11). ‘Totemism’, Encyclopaedia Britannica , 11th ed., 27, 79.
Lang, A. (1911). ‘Lord Avebury on Marriage, Totemism, and Religion’, Folk-
Lore, 22, 402.bibliography 191Leslie, D. (1875). Among the Zulus and Amatongas , 2nd ed., Edinburgh.
Low, H. (1848). Sarawak , London.
Lozano, P. (1733). Descripcion . . . del Gran Chaco , Cordova.
Lubbock, J. (1870). The Origin of Civilisatión , London.
McLennan, J. F. (1865). Primitive Marriage , Edinburgh. (Reprinted in same
author’s Studies in Ancient History , London, 1876.)
McLennan, J. F. (1869–70). ‘The Worship of Animals and Plants’, Fort-
nightly Rev ., N.S. 6, 407 and 562; N.S. 7, 194. (Reprinted in same
author’s Studies in Ancient History; Second Series , London, 1896.)
Maori, A Pakeha [pseud. for Maning, F. E.] (1884). Old New Zealand , new
ed., London.
Marett, R. R. (1900). ‘Pre-Animistic Religion’. Folk-Lore , 11, 162.
Marillier, L. (1898). ‘La place du totémisme dans l’évolution religieuse’,
Rev. Hist. Relig ., 37, 204.
Mariner, W. (1818). An Account of the Natives of the Tonga Islands , 2nd ed.
(2 vols.), London. (1st ed., 1817.)
Max-Müller, F. (1897). Contributions to the Science of Mythology  (2 vols.),
London.
Morgan, L. H. (1877). Ancient Society , London.
Müller, S. (1857). Reizen en Onderzoekingen in den Indischen Archipel ,
Amsterdam.
Parkinson, R. (1907). Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee , Stuttgart.
Paulitschke, P. (1893–6). Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas  (2 vols.), Berlin.
Peckel, P. G. (1908). ‘Die Verwandtschaftsnamen des mittleren Neumeck-
lenburg’, Anthropos , 3, 456.
Pickler, J., and Somló, F. (1900). Der Ursprung des Totemismus , Berlin.
Rank, O. (1907). Der Künstler , Vienna.
Rank, O. (1912). Das Inzestmotiv in Dichtung und Sage , Vienna.
Rank, O. (1913). ‘Eine noch nicht beschriebene Form des Ödipus-
Traumes’, Int. Z. Psychoanal ., 1, 151.
Reinach, S. (1905–12). Cultes, mythes et religions  (4 vols.), Paris.
Reitler, R. (1913). ‘Zur Augensymbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal ., 1, 159.
Ribbe, C. (1903). Zwei Jahre unter den Kannibalen der Salomo-Inseln ,
Dresden.
Rivers, W. H. R. (1909). ‘Totemism in Polynesia and Melanesia’, J. R.
anthrop. inst ., 39, 156.
Roth, H. Ling (1896). The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo
(2 vols.), London.
Schreber, D. P. (1903). Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken , Leipzig.
Silberer, H. (1909). ‘Bericht über eine Methode, gewisse symbolischetotem and taboo 192Halluzinations-Erscheinungen hervorzurufen und zu beobachten’,
Jb. psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch ., 1, 513.
Smith, W. Robertson (1894). Lectures on the Religion of the Semites , new
[2nd] ed., London. (1st ed., 1889.)
Spencer, B., and Gillen, F. J. (1899). The Native Tribes of Central Australia ,
London.
Spencer, H. (1870). ‘The Origin of Animal Worship’, Fortnightly Rev ., N.S. 7,
535.
Spencer, H. (1893). The Principles of Sociology , 3rd ed., Vol. I, London.
Stekel, W. (1911). ‘Die Verpﬂichtung des Namens’, Z. Psychother. med.
Psychol., 3.
Storfer, A. J. (1911). Zur Sonderstellung des Vatermordes , Vienna.
Taylor, R. (1870). Te Ika a Maui , 2nd ed., London. (1st ed., 1855.)
Teit, J. A. (1900). The Thompson Indians of British Columbia (Jesup North
Paciﬁc Expedition , Vol. I), New York.
Thomas, N. W. (1910–11 a). ‘Magic’, Encyclopaedia Britannica , 11th ed., 17,
304.
Thomas, N. W. (1910–11 b). ‘Taboo’, Encyclopaedia Britannica , 11th ed., 26,
337.
Tylor, E. B. (1889). ‘A Method of Investigating the Development of Institu-
tions’, J. anthrop. Inst ., 18, 245.
Tylor, E. B. (1891). Primitive Culture , 3rd ed. (2 vols.), London. (1st ed.,
1871.)
Westermarck, E. (1901). The History of Human Marriage , 3rd ed., London.
(1st ed., 1891.)
Westermarck, E. (1906–8). The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas
(2 vols.), London.
Wilken, G. A. (1884). ‘Het animisme bij de volken van den Indischen
Archipel’, Ind. Gids , 6 (Part I), 925.
Wulff, M. [Woolf, M.] (1912). ‘Beiträge zur infantilen Sexualität’, Zbl.
Psychoanal ., 2, 6.
Wundt, W. (1906). Mythus und Religion , Teil II ( Völkerpsychologie , Band II),
Leipzig.
Wundt, W. (1912). Elemente der Völkerpsychologie , Leipzig.
(Trans.: Elements of Folk Psychology , New York and London, 1916.)
Zweifel, J., and Moustier, M. (1880). Voyage aux sources du Niger ,
Marseilles.bibliography 193INDEX
Abasia 60
Abel, K. 78
Abipone 65Abraham , K. 66, 148
Adelaide Bay 64Adonis 177aﬀection, excessive in neurotics 57
agoraphobia 113Agutaino 62Aino 63, 92, 161Akamba 13, 63Allen, Grant 68
ambivalence: origin of 182; towards
an object 34–5; towards the dead71–4; towards the mother-in-law16
amnesia 35Anaximander 178ancestors, veneration of 76animal phobias in children
148–52
animalism 88animals, relation of children to
147–50
animatism 88, 107animism 76, 87–90; and totemism
138
Apache 47Apepi 92Aphrodite 177appeasement 42–8Arpád, little 152–3Arunta 133–5, 154Atkinson , J.J. 146, 165
atonement for violation of taboo 24,
40
Attis 177Australian aboriginees 1–5auto-erotism 103Avebury , Lord, see Lubbock , J.
avoidances 12–20; and incest 19Aztec 161
Bachofen , J. J. 167Bacon, Francis  96
Banks’ Island 14, 137Barongo 13Basoga 15Bastian , A. 53, 55
Batchelor , J. 94
Batta 13Bedouin 156, 161Bini 162Bleuler , E. 35
Blumentritt , F. 62
Boas, F. 62, 68, 138
Book of Rights in Ireland 54Borneo 43, 63British Columbia 62British East Africa 13British New Guinea 63Brown , W. 51
Cambodia 54
Cameron , A. L. P . 6
cannibalism 95Cape Padron 53castration, fear of 151, 177catechism, totemic 118–19categorical imperative x, 26Catholic Church and incest 10Celebes 43ceremonial prohibitions 32Cervantes  59
children’s play and primitive
imitative representation 98
Choctaw 44, 47chorus in Greek tragedy 180–7Christ 178, 182Christianity 177–9Churinga , amulets 133
circumcision 177classi ﬁcatory system of relationships
7–20
Codrington , R. H. 12, 14, 96
collective mind 182–7communion, Christian 179–81
conception theory of the Arunta
133–5, 136–7
conscience 79, 80, 81co-operative magic 134, 136court ceremonial 50Crawley , E. 15, 17
Cybele 177
Dacota 44
Darwin , C. 145, 146, 147, 164, 165
dead: the contact with unclean
60–1; fear of 67–9; name taboo64–8; transformed into demons68–74
death: and belief in souls and demons
102; from eating a taboo anima25; wishes 73, 81, 82, 84, 101
Delagoa Bay 13délire du toucher  31
demons, fear of 67, 69, 70, 72, 76Dieri 8Dionysus 178, 181Dobrizho ﬀer, M. 65
Dorsey , J. O. 45
dreams, interpretation of 112–15;
secondary revision 76, 111
dualism of body and soul 109Durkheim , E. 131, 135, 140, 144,
146
Dyak 44, 46, 94
Eastern Bantu 15
Eder, M. D. 151
Ellis, Havelock  142
Ellis, W. 61
Encounter Bay 64Encyclopaedia Britannica  22, 90
Eskimo, Central 68exogamy: and totemism 5,
122–4, 139–46, 170; de ﬁnition
of 5index
196father: killing of 164–9; longing for
172
father-complex 59, 60, 164, 166,
169
feasts 156, 163Ferenczi , S. 150, 151, 152, 177
fertility magic 92Fiji 12Fison, L. 8, 13, 15, 19, 129
Flamen Dialis 53Flaminica 54Fraser, J. 68
fraternal clans 169, 172, 173Frazer, J. G. passim ; on Christian
communion 181; on exogamy 4,5, 139, 143; on gods and men173; on incest 5, 143; on kingship59, 64; on magic 94, 97; on taboo42, 48, 55; on totemism 4, 120,122, 124–8, 134–8
Galla 43
Garcilasso de la Vega 128Gazelle Peninsula 12ghosts, fear of 45, 48, 66–9, 76Gillen, F. J. 8, 132, 135, 136
Gilyak 94gods: and sacred animals 171–5;
concepts of 174; creation of 173;father-surrogates 171, 175
Goldenweiser , A. 127
gorilla 146Gramburg , J. S. G. 44
Greek tragedy 180–7group marriage 8Guaycuru 64guilt, sense of 79–86, 101–4,
166–9, 174, 178, 183–4
Guis, Le Père J . 63
Haddon , A. G. 131, 133
Haeberlin , P. 76Hamlet 98
hangman 48Hans, little 150, 151, 153Hawaii 61hero, in Greek tragedy 180–1Hill-T out , C. 138
Hobley , C. W. 14
horde, primal 146, 164–6, 173horror of incest: among savages 7,
11; origin of 142–4
hostility to the dead, unconscious
70–2, 74, 77
Howitt , A. W. 141
Hubert , H. 91, 163
Hume 89
identi ﬁcation of parents with their
children 18
inbreeding 143–4Inca 128incest: and totem-kinship 6–7;
importance of in neurosis 19;punishment of 4–6; theme inpoetry 20; see horror of incest
incestuous nature of early love
objects 20, 144
infantilism, neurotic 20inhibition, developmental 20Intichiuma  ceremony 132–4, 162
Ireland, kings of 54
Japan 52, 53, 55, 63, 92
Java 94Jevons, F. B. 68, 160
Joustra , M. 13
Jung, C. G. ix, 170, 175
Junod, H. A. 13
Kaempfer , E. 53
Kant x
Keane, A. H. 128
King Kukulu 53index
197kings, divine 174; see rulers
king’s evil 49kinship 156–62Kleinpaul , R. 68, 69
Labbé, P. 95
Lambert , Le Père  12
Lang, A. 4, 11, 88, 127, 128, 129,
130, 131, 135, 137, 140, 146
Leper’s Island 12Leslie, D. 17
libidinal development 103, 105Loango 53Logea 46Long, J. 4
Low, H. 45
Lozano , P. 64
Lubbock , J. 16, 129
McLennan , J. F. 4, 117, 127, 140
Macbeth 45Madagascar 63magic: and cannibalism 95; and
sorcery 91–6; bond betweenwound and weapon 95;contagious 95–9; e ﬃgies 92;
fertility 93; homoeopathic 94;imitative 95, 97, 98; of kings 48,56; of names 65, 67, 95; rain 93,94
males, bands of 164–9Mana 22, 24, 38, 40
manism 88Maori 32, 60, 68, 112Maori, A Pakeha 51Marett , R. R. 88, 105, 106
Marillier , L. 162
Mariner , W. 61
Masai 64masturbation, prohibition of 149,
152
matriarchy 167Mauss , M. 91, 163
Max-Müller , F. 118
Mekeo 62Mikado 52–5Mithras 178Mongols of Tartary 63Monumbo 46Mother Earth 177mother-goddesses 173mother-in-law: ambivalent relation
17; and son-in-law in civilizedcommunities 14–20; avoidance12–20; jokes 17
Morgan , L. H. 7, 141
Motumotu 46mourning: and name taboos 62, 65,
66; and sacri ﬁces 163, 176;
customs 62, 63; function of; 76
Moustier , M. 58
Müller , S. 46
names: signi ﬁcance of to children
and savages 65, 130; signi ﬁcance
of to obsessional neurotics 66; ofthe dead, taboo 64–8
Nandi 63narcissism 103–5, 108Natchez 47necessity and cultural products, 108New Britain 12New Caledonia 12, 165New Guinea 46, 47New Hebrides 11New Mecklenburg 12New Mexico 162New South Wales 5Nicobar Islands 63, 67Nilus, St. 161, 178Niue 54Noa 21, 22Norwich 96Nuba 48index
198nuclear complex of neurosis 20, 37,
149, 181
obedience, deferred 166
obsessional neurosis: and conscience
80; and omnipotence of thoughts99; and sense of guilt 80–2; andtaboo compared 31–3, 40–2
obsessional prohibitions:
displacement of 32, 33, 35;lacking in motive 31, 32, 33
obsessive acts 33, 35, 42, 59, 101,
102
obsessive self-reproach 69, 70, 77Œdipus 80, 94, 153Œdipus complex 149, 151, 153,
167, 181
original sin 178omnipotence of thoughts: and art
105; origin of term 99
Orpheus 178, 180Osage 44Ouataouak 161
Palawan 62
Paloo 43Paraguay 64paranoia 50, 108, 111Parkinson , R. 12
patriarchal societies 173Paulitschke , P. 44
pavor nocturnus  149
Peckel, P. G. 13
persecution delusions 50Philippine Islands 62, 63Phobias: animal 147–9; dog 149,
152–3; horse 149
Phratries 10–11Pickler , J. 128
Pima 47Pliny 96
Port Patteson 14prohibitions and underlying desires
80, 82
projection 71–3, 108, 109psychical reality and sense of guilt
185–7
puberty ceremonies and avoidances
12
puriﬁcation ceremonies 23, 47
Ra 92
rain magic 93, 94Rank, O. 20, 151, 152
razors, in a neurosis 112regression 20Reinach , S. 90, 105 118, 125, 131,
177, 180
reincarnation theory of the Arunta
133, 136
Reitler , R. 151
religion: and father-complex 169;
origin of 116, 165
renunciation 33, 40, 41repression 35restrictions upon a victorious slayer,
35, 46, 47
Ribbe, C. 14
Richard III 45Rivers, W. H . R . 137
Roth, H. Ling  94
rulers: authority over nature 51, 53,
56, 59; danger of contact with49–51, 56; godlike power of 51–3;healing touch of 49, 56; magicpowers of 48, 56; privileged 55–6;responsibility of 52–5; restrictionsimposed on 52–4; to be guarded48, 51–3, 56; to be guardedagainst 48–51; unconscioushostility to 57, 60
sacriﬁce: 154–62, 171, 174, 175;
and feasting 156; animal 155,index
199157–62, 175; by ﬁre 155; drink-
oﬀering 156; human 162, 175; in
ancient Semitic religions 154, 175,176; theanthropic 175, 176;vegetable 155
sacriﬁcial meal 156–62
Samoyeds 63Sancho Panza 60Sarawak 44Savage, Dr. 146
Savage Island 54Schelling  89
Schopenhauer  102
Schreber , D. P. 108
scrofula 49secondary revision and the
construction of systems 75,111–12
Shark Point 53Shuswap 62Siberia 63Sierra Leone 54, 58Silberer , H. 175
Smith, W .  Robertson  154–62, 163, 165,
166, 171, 175, 176, 180
social instincts 84–6Solomon Islands 14Somló, F. 128
Sophocles 94sorcery and magic 91soul: animals 138; external 135;
primitive conception of 89, 109,110; transmigration of 137
Spencer , B. 8, 132, 135, 136, 141
Spencer , H. 88, 90, 109, 128
spirits: and the unconscious 110;
creation of 109; doctrine of 107;evil 108
Stekel, W. 66
Storfer , A. J. 11
Sully, J. 105
Sumatra 13superstition 113–15
system-formation and secondary
revision 75, 111–12
taboo: and conscience 78, 79; and
enemies 42; and magic or demonicpower 25, 26, 28, 29; andobsessional neurosis 30, 85; andpenal systems 24, 84; andsymptomatic acts 115;classi ﬁcation of 22; meaning of 21,
26, 77, 78; objects of 23–4; onnames 63–7; on rulers 48; on thedead 60; on widows 62; origin of36; punishment for violation of24, 25, 39, 83; sacred and unclean21, 29, 77, 78; sickness 30;transmissibility of; 24, 25, 32, 33,38, 40, 48, 84; Wundt’s account of26–30
Talion, law of 178Tammuz 177Tasmania 63Ta-ta-thi 5T aylor, R. 33, 51, 68
T eit, J. A. 62
temptation to imitate 38–40, 71, 84Thomas , N. W. 22, 97
Timmes 58Timor 43, 46Tinguiane 63Titans 178–9Toaripi 46Toda 63Tonga 61totem: ancestor of the clan 3, 121,
123, 125, 152; and blood-relationships 4, 7; clan 3, 120,122; de ﬁnition of 3–4; eating of
prohibited 3, 121, 123; Frazer’saccount of 120–3; individual 120;inheritance of 4, 7; kangaroo andindex
200emu 6; killing of prohibited 3, 38,
121, 167; sex 120
totem animal: father substitute 152,
164, 167, 172; identi ﬁcation with
122, 152
totem meal 154, 161–2, 163–5, 171,
179
totemic festivals 3totemic religion and the sense of guilt
168
totemism: countries in which found
4; essential characteristics of 124;nominalist theories 128–32;origin of 127–39; psychologicaltheories 135–9; Reinach’s codeof 118–19; 125; religious and social121, 124; sociological theories131–5; Wundt’s account of123–4; and taboo restrictions 39;prohibition against in earlychildhood 34, 35
touching phobia 32, 34–6, 39, 85Tuareg 63, 67T ylor, E. B. 17, 88, 90, 92, 97
unconscious positive desires 82, 83
Urabunna 8
vampires 69
Vanua Lava 14Victoria 64
Wakamba 13
washing mania 33Westermarck , E. 8, 68, 69, 72, 142, 143
widows, taboo 62Wilken , G. A. 94, 137
will and wishes 98–9Wulif, M. 148
Wundt , W . ix, 4, 22, 26–30, 68, 72,
76, 77, 88, 89, 90, 107, 118, 123,138
Zulu 16
Zuni 162Zweifel , J. 58index
201