4462  
 
CIVILIZATION AND ITS DISCONTENTS  
(1930) 
 4463  
 
Intentionally left blank 
 4464  
 
CIVILIZATION AND ITS DISCONTENTS  
 
I 
 
It is impossible to escape the impression that people commonly use false standards of measurement - that they seek power, success and wealth for themselves and admire them in others, and that they underestimate what is of true value in life. And yet, in making any general judgement of this sort, we are in 
danger of forgetting how variegated the human world and its mental life are. There are a few men from 
whom their contemporaries do not withhold admiration, although their greatness rests on attributes and achievements which are completely foreign to the aims and ideals of the multitude. One might easily be 
inclined to suppose that it is after all only a minorit y which appreciates these great men, while the large 
majority cares nothing for them. But things are probably not as simple as that, thanks to the discrepancies 
between people’s thoughts and their actions, and to the diversity of their wishful impulses. 
   One of these exceptional few calls himself my friend in his letters to me. I had sent him my small book 
that treats religion as an illusion, and he answered that he entirely agreed with my judgement upon religion, but that he was sorry I had not properly appreciated the true source of religious sentiments. This, he says, 
consists in a peculiar feeling, which he himself is never without, which he finds confirmed by many others, 
and which he may suppose is present in millions of people. It is a feeling which he would like to call a 
sensation of ‘eternity’, a feeling as of something limitless, unbounded - as it were, ‘oceanic’. This feeling, he adds, is a purely subjective fact, not an article of faith; it brings with it no assurance of personal immortality, 
but it is the source of the religious energy whic h is seized upon by the various Churches and religious 
systems, directed by them into particular channels, and doubtless also exhausted by them. One may, he thinks, rightly call oneself religious on the ground of this oceanic feeling alone, even if one rejects every 
belief and every illusion. 
 4465  
 
   The views expressed by the friend whom I so much honour, and who himself once praised the magic of 
illusion in a poem,¹ caused me no small difficulty. I cannot discover this ‘oceanic’ feeling in myself. It is not 
easy to deal scientifically with feelings. One can attempt to describe their physiological signs. Where this is not possible - and I am afraid that the oceanic feeling too will defy this kind of characterization - nothing remains but to fall back on the ideational content which is most readily associated with the feeling. If I have 
understood my friend rightly, he means the same thing by it as the consolation offered by an original and 
somewhat eccentric dramatist to his hero who is faci ng a self-inflicted death. ‘We cannot fall out of this 
world.’² That is to say, it is a feeling of an indissoluble bond, of being one with the external world as a 
whole. I may remark that to me this seems something rather in the nature of an intellectual perception, 
which is not, it is true, without an accompanying feeling-tone, but only such as would be present with any other act of thought of equal range. From my own exper ience I could not convince myself of the primary 
nature of such a feeling. But this gives me no right to deny that it does in fact occur in other people. The only question is whether it is being correctly interpreted and whether it ought to be regarded as the fons et 
origo of the whole need for religion.  
   ¹ Liluli. Since the publication of his two books La vie de Ramakrishna  and La vie de Vivekananda, I need no longer 
hide the fact that the friend spoken of in the text is Romain Rolland. 
   ² Christian Dietrich Grabbe, Hannibal : ‘Ja, aus der Welt werden wir nicht fallen. Wir sind einmal darin.’ 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4466  
 
   I have nothing to suggest which could have a decisiv e influence on the solution of this problem. The idea 
of men’s receiving an intimation of their connection with the world around them through an immediate 
feeling which is from the outset directed to that purpose sounds so strange and fits in so badly with the fabric of our psychology that one is justified in attempting to discover a psycho-analytic - that is, a genetic - explanation of such a feeling. The following line of thought suggests itself. Normally, there is nothing of 
which we are more certain than the feeling of our self, of our own ego. This ego appears to us as something 
autonomous and unitary, marked off distinctly from ev erything else. That such an appearance is deceptive, 
and that on the contrary the ego is continued inwards, without any sharp delimitation, into an unconscious 
mental entity which we designate as the id and for which it serves as a kind of façade - this was a discovery 
first made by psycho-analytic research, which should still have much more to tell us about the relation of 
the ego to the id. But towards the outside, at any rate, the ego seems to maintain clear and sharp lines of 
demarcation. There is only one state - admittedly an unus ual state, but not one that can be stigmatized as 
pathological - in which it does not do this. At the height of being in love the boundary between ego and 
object threatens to melt away. Against all the evidence of  his senses, a man who is in love declares that ‘I’ 
and ‘you’ are one, and is prepared to behave as if it were a fact. What can be temporarily done away with 
by a physiological function must also, of course, be liable to be disturbed by pathological processes. 
Pathology has made us acquainted with a great number of states in which the boundary lines between the ego and the external world become uncertain or in which they are actually drawn incorrectly. There are 
cases in which parts of a person’s own body, even portions of his own mental life - his perceptions, 
thoughts and feelings -, appear alien to him and as not belonging to his ego; there are other cases in which he ascribes to the external world things that clearly originate in his own ego and that ought to be 
acknowledged by it. Thus even the feeling of our own ego is subject to disturbances and the boundaries of 
the ego are not constant.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4467  
 
   Further reflection tells us that the adult’s ego-feeling cannot have been the same from the beginning. It 
must have gone through a process of development, which cannot, of course, be demonstrated but which 
admits of being constructed with a fair degree of probability.¹ An infant at the breast does not as yet distinguish his ego from the external world as the source of the sensations flowing in upon him. He gradually learns to do so, in response to various promptings. He must be very strongly impressed by the 
fact that some sources of excitation, which he will later recognize as his own bodily organs, can provide him 
with sensations at any moment, whereas other sources evade him from time to time - among them what he desires most of all, his mother’s breast - and only reappear as a result of his screaming for help. In this way 
there is for the first time set over against the ego an ‘object’, in the form of something which exists ‘outside’ 
and which is only forced to appear by a special action. A further incentive to a disengagement of the ego from the general mass of sensations - that is, to the recognition of an ‘outside’, an external world - is 
provided by the frequent, manifold and unavoidable sensations of pain and unpleasure the removal and 
avoidance of which is enjoined by the pleasure principle,  in the exercise of its unrestricted domination. A 
tendency arises to separate from the ego everything that can become a source of such unpleasure, to throw it outside and to create a pure pleasure-ego which is confronted by a strange and threatening 
‘outside’. The boundaries of this primitive pleasure-ego cannot escape rectification through experience. Some of the things that one is unwilling to give up,  because they give pleasure, are nevertheless not ego 
but object; and some sufferings that one seeks to expel turn out to be inseparable from the ego in virtue of 
their internal origin. One comes to learn a procedure by which, through a deliberate direction of one’s 
sensory activities and through suitable muscular action, one can differentiate between what is internal - what belongs to the ego - and what is external - what emanates from the outer world. In this way one 
makes the first step towards the introduction of the reality principle which is to dominate future 
development. This differentiation, of course, serves the practical purpose of enabling one to defend oneself against sensations of unpleasure which one actually feel s or with which one is threatened. In order to fend 
off certain unpleasurable excitations arising from within, the ego can use no other methods than those 
which it uses against unpleasure coming from without, and this is the starting-point of important 
pathological disturbances.  
   ¹ Cf. the many writings on the topic of ego-development and ego-feeling, dating from Ferenczi’s paper on ‘Stages in 
the Development of the Sense of Reality’ (1913) to Federn’s contributions of 1926, 1927 and later.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4468  
 
   In this way, then, the ego detaches itself from the external world. Or, to put it more correctly, originally the 
ego includes everything, later it separates off an external world from itself. Our present ego-feeling is, 
therefore, only a shrunken residue of a much more inclusive - indeed, an all-embracing - feeling which corresponded to a more intimate bond between the ego and the world about it. If we may assume that there are many people in whose mental life this primary ego-feeling has persisted to a greater or less degree, it 
would exist in them side by side with the narrower and more sharply demarcated ego-feeling of maturity, 
like a kind of counterpart to it. In that case, the ideat ional contents appropriate to it would be precisely those 
of limitlessness and of a bond with the universe - the same ideas with which my friend elucidated the 
‘oceanic’ feeling. 
   But have we a right to assume the survival of something that was originally there, alongside of what was later derived from it? Undoubtedly. There is nothing strange in such a phenomenon, whether in the mental 
field or elsewhere. In the animal kingdom we hold to the view that the most highly developed species have 
proceeded from the lowest; and yet we find all the simple forms still in existence to-day. The race of the great saurians is extinct and has made way for the mammals; but a true representative of it, the crocodile, still lives among us. This analogy may be too remote, and it is also weakened by the circumstance that the 
lower species which survive are for the most part not  the true ancestors of the present-day more highly 
developed species. As a rule the intermediate links have died out and are known to us only through reconstruction. In the realm of the mind, on the other hand, what is primitive is so commonly preserved 
alongside of the transformed version which has arisen from  it that it is unnecessary to give instances as 
evidence. When this happens it is usually in consequence of a divergence in development: one portion (in 
the quantitative sense) of an attitude or instinctual impulse has remained unaltered, while another portion 
has undergone further development. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4469  
 
   This brings us to the more general problem of preservation in the sphere of the mind. The subject has 
hardly been studied yet; but it is so attractive and important that we may be allowed to turn our attention to 
it for a little, even though our excuse is insufficient. Since we overcame the error of supposing that the forgetting we are familiar with signified a destruction of the memory-trace - that is, its annihilation - we have been inclined to take the opposite view, that in ment al life nothing which has once been formed can perish - 
that everything is somehow preserved and that in suitable circumstances (when, for instance, regression goes back far enough) it can once mote be brought to light. Let us try to grasp what this assumption involves by taking an analogy from another field. We will choose as an example the history of the Eternal 
City.¹ Historians tell us that the oldest Rome was the Roma Quadrata , a fenced settlement on the Palatine. 
Then followed the phase of the Septimontium , a federation of the settlements on the different hills; after that 
came the city bounded by the Servian wall; and later still, after all the transformations during the periods of 
the republic and the early Caesars, the city which the Emperor Aurelian surrounded with his walls. We will 
not follow the changes which the city went through any further, but we will ask ourselves how much a visitor, whom we will suppose to be equipped with the most complete historical and topographical knowledge, may still find left of these early stages in t he Rome of to-day. Except for a few gaps, he will see 
the wall of Aurelian almost unchanged. In some places he will be able to find sections of the Servian wall where they have been excavated and brought to light. If he knows enough - more than present-day archaeology does - he may perhaps be able to trace out in the plan of the city the whole course of that wall 
and the outline of the Roma Quadrata . Of the buildings which once occupied this ancient area he will find 
nothing, or only scanty remains, for they exist no longer. The best information about Rome in the republican 
era would only enable him at the most to point out the sites where the temples and public buildings of that 
period stood. Their place is now taken by ruins, but not  by ruins of themselves but of later restorations 
made after fires or destruction. It is hardly necessary to remark that all these remains of ancient Rome are 
found dovetailed into the jumble of a great metropolis  which has grown up in the last few centuries since 
the Renaissance. There is certainly not a little that is ancient still buried in the soil of the city or beneath its 
modern buildings. This is the manner in which the past is preserved in historical sites like Rome. 
 
   ¹ Based on The Cambridge Ancient History , 7 (1928): ‘The Founding of Rome’ by Hugh Last. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4470  
 
   Now let us, by a flight of imagination, suppose t hat Rome is not a human habitation but a psychical entity 
with a similarly long and copious past - an entity, that is to say, in which nothing that has once come into 
existence will have passed away and all the earlier phas es of development continue to exist alongside the 
latest one. This would mean that in Rome the palac es of the Caesars and the Septizonium of Septimius 
Severus would still be rising to their old height on the Palatine and that the castle of S. Angelo would still be 
carrying on its battlements the beautiful statues which graced it until the siege by the Goths, and so on. But 
more than this. In the place occupied by the Palazzo Caffarelli would once more stand - without the Palazzo having to be removed - the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus; and this not only in its latest shape, as the 
Romans of the Empire saw it, but also in its earliest one, when it still showed Etruscan forms and was 
ornamented with terracotta antefixes. Where the Coliseum now stands we could at the same time admire Nero’s vanished Golden House. On the Piazza of the Pantheon we should find not only the Pantheon of to-
day, as it was bequeathed to us by Hadrian, but, on the same site, the original edifice erected by Agrippa; indeed, the same piece of ground would be supporting the church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva and the ancient temple over which it was built. And the observer would perhaps only have to change the direction of his glance or his position in order to call up the one view or the other. 
   There is clearly no point in spinning our phantasy any further, for it leads to things that are unimaginable 
and even absurd. If we want to represent historical sequence in spatial terms we can only do it by juxtaposition in space: the same space cannot have two different contents. Our attempt seems to be an idle 
game. It has only one justification. It shows us how far we are from mastering the characteristics of mental life by representing them in pictorial terms.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4471  
 
   There is one further objection which has to be considered. The question may be raised why we chose 
precisely the past of a city to compare with the past of the mind. The assumption that everything past is 
preserved holds good even in mental life only on conditi on that the organ of the mind has remained intact 
and that its tissues have not been damaged by trauma or inflammation. But destructive influences which 
can be compared to causes of illness like these are never lacking in the history of a city, even if it has had a 
less chequered past than Rome, and even if, like London, it has hardly ever suffered from the visitations of an enemy. Demolitions and replacement of buildings o ccur in the course of the most peaceful development 
of a city. A city is thus a priori  unsuited for a comparison of this sort with a mental organism. 
   We bow to this objection; and, abandoning our attempt to draw a striking contrast, we will turn instead to what is after all a more closely related object of comparison - the body of an animal or a human being. But here, too, we find the same thing. The earlier phases of development are in no sense still preserved; they 
have been absorbed into the later phases for which they have supplied the material. The embryo cannot be discovered in the adult. The thymus gland of childhood is replaced after puberty by connective tissue, but is no longer present itself; in the marrow-bones of the grow n man I can, it is true, trace the outline of the 
child’s bone, but it itself has disappeared, having l engthened and thickened until it has attained its definitive 
form. The fact remains that only in the mind is such a preservation of all the earlier stages alongside of the final form possible, and that we are not in a position to represent this phenomenon in pictorial terms.    Perhaps we are going too far in this. Perhaps we ought to content ourselves with asserting that what is 
past in mental life may be preserved and is not necessarily  destroyed. It is always possible that even in the 
mind some of what is old is effaced or absorbed - whether in the normal course of things or as an exception 
- to such an extent that it cannot be restored or revivified by any means; or that preservation in general is 
dependent on certain favourable conditions. It is possible, but we know nothing about it. We can only hold 
fast to the fact that it is rather the rule than t he exception for the past to be preserved in mental life. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4472  
 
   Thus we are perfectly willing to acknowledge that the ‘oceanic’ feeling exists in many people, and we are 
inclined to trace it back to an early phase of ego-feeling. The further question then arises, what claim this 
feeling has to be regarded as the source of religious needs.    To me the claim does not seem compelling. After all, a feeling can only be a source of energy if it is itself the expression of a strong need. The derivation of re ligious needs from the infant’s helplessness and the 
longing for the father aroused by it seems to me incont rovertible, especially since the feeling is not simply 
prolonged from childhood days, but is permanently sustained by fear of the superior power of Fate. I cannot think of any need in childhood as strong as the need for a father’s protection. Thus the part played by the 
oceanic feeling, which might seek something like the restoration of limitless narcissism, is ousted from a 
place in the foreground. The origin of the religious attitude can be traced back in clear outlines as far as the feeling of infantile helplessness. There may be something further behind that, but for the present it is 
wrapped in obscurity. 
   I can imagine that the oceanic feeling became connected with religion later on. The ‘oneness with the universe’ which constitutes its ideational content sounds like a first attempt at a religious consolation, as though it were another way of disclaiming the danger which the ego recognizes as threatening it from the 
external world. Let me admit once more that it is very difficult for me to work with these almost intangible 
quantities. Another friend of mine, whose insatiable craving for knowledge has led him to make the most unusual experiments and has ended by giving him encyclopaedic knowledge, has assured me that through 
the practices of Yoga, by withdrawing from the worl d, by fixing the attention on bodily functions and by 
peculiar methods of breathing, one can in fact evoke new sensations and coenaesthesias in oneself, which 
he regards as regressions to primordial states of mind which have long ago been overlaid. He sees in them 
a physiological basis, as it were, of much of the wisdom of mysticism. It would not be hard to find 
connections here with a number of obscure modifications of mental life, such as trances and ecstasies. But I am moved to exclaim in the words of Schiller’s diver:-  
    ‘. . . Es freue sich.     Wer da atmet im rosigten Licht.’  
Civilization And Its Discontents4473  
 
II 
 
In my Future of an Illusion  I was concerned much less with the deepest sources of the religious feeling than 
with what the common man understands by his religion - with the system of doctrines and promises which on the one hand explains to him the riddles of this world with enviable completeness, and, on the otter, 
assures him that a careful Providence will watch over his life and will compensate him in a future existence 
for any frustrations he suffers here. The common man cannot imagine this Providence otherwise than in the figure of an enormously exalted father. Only such a being can understand the needs of the children of men 
and be softened by their prayers and placated by the signs of their remorse. The whole thing is so patently infantile, so foreign to reality, that to anyone with a friendly attitude to humanity it is painful to think that the great majority of mortals will never be able to rise above this view of life. It is still more humiliating to 
discover how large a number of people living to-day, who cannot but see that this religion is not tenable, 
nevertheless try to defend it piece by piece in a series of pitiful rearguard actions. One would like to mix among the ranks of the believers in order to meet t hese philosophers, who think they can rescue the God of 
religion by replacing him by an impersonal, shadowy and abstract principle, and to address them with the 
warning words: ‘Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in Vain!’ And if some of the great men of 
the past acted in the same way, no appeal can be made to their example: we know why they were obliged to. 
   Let us return to the common man and to his religion - the only religion which ought to bear that name. The 
first thing that we think of is the well-known saying of one of our great poets and thinkers concerning the relation of religion to art and science: 
 
   Wer Wissenschaft und Kunst besitzt, hat auch Religion; 
   Wer jene beide nicht besitzt, der habe Religion!  
Civilization And Its Discontents4474  
 
   This saying on the one hand draws an antithesis between religion and the two highest achievements of 
man, and on the other, asserts that, as regards their value in life, those achievements and religion can 
represent or replace each other. If we also set out to deprive the common man of his religion, we shall clearly not have the poet’s authority on our side. We will choose a particular path to bring us nearer an appreciation of his words. Life, as we find it, is too hard for us; it brings us too many pains, disappointments 
and impossible tasks. In order to bear it we cannot dispense with palliative measures. ‘We cannot do 
without auxiliary constructions’, as Theodor Fontane tells us. There are perhaps three such measures: powerful deflections, which cause us to make light of our misery; substitutive satisfactions, which diminish 
it; and intoxicating substances, which make us insensitive to it. Something of the kind is indispensable.¹ 
Voltaire has deflections in mind when he ends Candide  with the advice to cultivate one’s garden; and 
scientific activity is a deflection of this kind, too. The substitutive satisfactions, as offered by art, are illusions 
in contrast with reality, but they are none the less psychically effective, thanks to the role which phantasy 
has assumed in mental life. The intoxicating substanc es influence our body and alter its chemistry. It is no 
simple matter to see where religion has its place in this series. We must look further afield.    The question of the purpose of human life has been ra ised countless times; it has never yet received a 
satisfactory answer and perhaps does not admit of one.  Some of those who have asked it have added that 
if it should turn out that life has no purpose, it would lose all value for them. But this threat alters nothing. It looks, on the contrary, as though one had a right to dismiss the question, for it seems to derive from the 
human presumptuousness, many other manifestations of which are already familiar to us. Nobody talks 
about the purpose of the life of animals, unless, perhaps , it may be supposed to lie in being of service to 
man. But this view is not tenable either, for there ar e many animals of which man can make nothing, except 
to describe, classify and study them; and innumerable species of animals have escaped even this use, since they existed and became extinct before man set eyes on them. Once again, only religion can answer the question of the purpose of life. One can hardly be wrong in concluding that the idea of life having a 
purpose stands and falls with the religious system. 
 
   ¹ In Die Fromme Helene  Wilhelm Busch has said the same thing on a lower plane: ‘Wer Sorgen hat, hat auch Likör.’  
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4475  
 
   We will therefore turn to the less ambitious question of what men themselves show by their behaviour to 
be the purpose and intention of their lives. What do they demand of life and wish to achieve in it? The 
answer to this can hardly be in doubt. They strive after happiness; they want to become happy and to remain so. This endeavour has two sides, a positive and a negative aim. It aims, on the one hand, at an absence of pain and unpleasure, and, on the other, at the ex periencing of strong feelings of pleasure. In its 
narrower sense the word ‘happiness’ only relates to the last. In conformity with this dichotomy in his aims, man’s activity develops in two directions, according as it seeks to realize - in the main, or even exclusively - the one or the other of these aims. 
   As we see, what decides the purpose of life is simply the programme of the pleasure principle. This 
principle dominates the operation of the mental appar atus from the start. There can be no doubt about its 
efficacy, and yet its programme is at loggerheads with the whole world, with the macrocosm as much as with the microcosm. There is no possibility at all of its being carried through; all the regulations of the 
universe run counter to it. One feels inclined to say that the intention that man should be ‘happy’ is not 
included in the plan of ‘Creation’. What we call happiness in the strictest sense comes from the (preferably sudden) satisfaction of needs which have been dammed up to a high degree, and it is from its nature only 
possible as an episodic phenomenon. When any situation that is desired by the pleasure principle is 
prolonged, it only produces a feeling of mild content ment. We are so made that we can derive intense 
enjoyment only from a contrast and very little from a state of things.¹ Thus our possibilities of happiness are 
already restricted by our constitution. Unhappiness is much less difficult to experience. We are threatened 
with suffering from three directions: from our own body, which is doomed to decay and dissolution and which cannot even do without pain and anxiety as warning signals; from the external world, which may rage 
against us with overwhelming and merciless forces of destruction; and finally from our relations to other men. The suffering which comes from this last source is perhaps more painful to us than any other. We tend to regard it as a kind of gratuitous addition, although it cannot be any less fatefully inevitable than the suffering which comes from elsewhere. 
 
   ¹ Goethe, indeed, warns us that ‘nothing is harder to bear than a succession of fair days.’ But this may be an 
exaggeration. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4476  
 
   It is no wonder if, under the pressure of these possibilities of suffering, men are accustomed to moderate 
their claims to happiness - just as the pleasure principle itself, indeed, under the influence of the external 
world, changed into the more modest reality principle -, if a man thinks himself happy merely to have escaped unhappiness or to have survived his suffering, and if in general the task of avoiding suffering pushes that of obtaining pleasure into the background. Reflection shows that the accomplishment of this 
task can be attempted along very different paths; and all these paths have been recommended by the 
various schools of worldly wisdom and put into practice by men. An unrestricted satisfaction of every need presents itself as the most enticing method of conduc ting one’s life, but it means putting enjoyment before 
caution, and soon brings its own punishment. The other methods, in which avoidance of unpleasure is the main purpose, are differentiated according to the source of unpleasure to which their attention is chiefly turned. Some of these methods are extreme and some moderate; some are one-sided and some attack the 
problem simultaneously at several points. Against the suffering which may come upon one from human 
relationships the readiest safeguard is voluntary is olation, keeping oneself aloof from other people. The 
happiness which can be achieved along this path is, as we see, the happiness of quietness. Against the 
dreaded external world one can only defend oneself by some kind of turning away from it, if one intends to 
solve the task by oneself. There is, indeed, another and better path: that of becoming a member of the 
human community, and, with the help of a technique guided by science, going over to the attack against 
nature and subjecting her to the human will. Then one is working with all for the good of all. But the most 
interesting methods of averting suffering are those which seem to influence our own organism. In the last 
analysis, all suffering is nothing else than sensation; it only exists in so far as we feel it, and we only feel it in consequence of certain ways in which our organism is regulated. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4477  
 
   The crudest, but also the most effective among these methods of influence is the chemical one - 
intoxication. I do not think that anyone completely understands its mechanism, but it is a fact that there are 
foreign substances which, when present in the blood or  tissues, directly cause us pleasurable sensations; 
and they also so alter the conditions governing our sensibility that we become incapable of receiving unpleasurable impulses. The two effects not only occur simultaneously, but seem to be intimately bound up 
with each other. But there must be substances in the chemistry of our own bodies which have similar 
effects, for we know at least one pathological state, mania, in which a condition similar to intoxication arises 
without the administration of any intoxicating drug. Besides this, our normal mental life exhibits oscillations 
between a comparatively easy liberation of pleasure and a comparatively difficult one, parallel with which 
there goes a diminished or an increased receptivity to unpleas ure. It is greatly to be regretted that this toxic 
side of mental processes has so far escaped scientific examination. The service rendered by intoxicating 
media in the struggle for happiness and in keeping misery at a distance is so highly prized as a benefit that 
individuals and peoples alike have given them an established place in the economics of their libido. We owe to such media not merely the immediate yield of pleasure, but also a greatly desired degree of independence from the external world. For one knows that, with the help of this ‘drowner of cares’ one can 
at any time withdraw from the pressure of reality and find refuge in a world of one’s own with better 
conditions of sensibility. As is well known, it is precisely this property of intoxicants which also determines their danger and their injuriousness. They are responsible, in certain circumstances, for the useless waste 
of a large quota of energy which might have been employed for the improvement of the human lot. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4478  
 
   The complicated structure of our mental apparatus admits, however, of a whole number of other 
influences. Just as a satisfaction of instinct spells happiness for us, so severe suffering is caused us if the 
external world lets us starve, if it refuses to sate our needs. One may therefore hope to be freed from a part of one’s sufferings by influencing the instinctual impulses. This type of defence against suffering is no longer brought to bear on the sensory apparatus; it seeks to master the internal sources of our needs. The 
extreme form of this is brought about by killing off the instincts, as is prescribed by the worldly wisdom of 
the East and practised by Yoga. If it succeeds, then the subject has, it is true, given up all other activities as well - he has sacrificed his life; and, by another pat h, he has once more only achieved the happiness of 
quietness. We follow the same path when our aims are less extreme and we merely attempt to control  our 
instinctual life. In that case, the controlling elements are the higher psychical agencies, which have subjected themselves to the reality principle. Here the aim of satisfaction is not by any means relinquished; 
but a certain amount of protection against suffering is secur ed, in that non-satisfaction is not so painfully felt 
in the case of instincts kept in dependence as in the case of uninhibited ones. As against this, there is an 
undeniable diminution in the potentialities of enjoyment. The feeling of happiness derived from the satisfaction of a wild instinctual impulse untamed by the ego is incomparably more intense than that derived 
from sating an instinct that has been tamed. The irresistibility of perverse instincts, and perhaps the attraction in general of forbidden things, finds an economic explanation here.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4479  
 
   Another technique for fending off suffering is the employment of the displacements of libido which our 
mental apparatus permits of and through which its function gai ns so much in flexibility. The task here is that 
of shifting the instinctual aims in such a way that they cannot come up against frustration from the external 
world. In this, sublimation of the instincts lends its assistance. One gains the most if one can sufficiently heighten the yield of pleasure from the sources of psychical and intellectual work. When that is so, fate can 
do little against one. A satisfaction of this kind, such as an artist’s joy in creating, in giving his phantasies 
body, or a scientist’s in solving problems or discovering truths, has a special quality which we shall certainly one day be able to characterize in metapsychological terms. At present we can only say figuratively that 
such satisfactions seem ‘finer and higher’. But their intensity is mild as compared with that derived from the 
sating of crude and primary instinctual impulses; it does not convulse our physical being. And the weak point of this method is that it is not applicable genera lly: it is accessible to only a few people. It presupposes 
the possession of special dispositions and gifts which are far from being common to any practical degree. And even to the few who do possess them, this method cannot give complete protection from suffering. It creates no impenetrable armour against the arrows of fortune, and it habitually fails when the source of 
suffering is a person’s own body.¹ 
 
   ¹ When there is no special disposition in a person which imperatively prescribes what direction his interests in life 
shall take, the ordinary professional work that is open to everyone can play the part assigned to it by Voltaire’s wise 
advice. It is not possible, within the limits of a short survey, to discuss adequately the significance of work for the economics of the libido. No other technique for the conduct of life attaches the individual so firmly to reality as laying emphasis on work; for his work at least gives him a secure place in a portion of reality, in the human community. The possibility it offers of displacing a large a mount of libidinal components, whether narcissistic, aggressive or even erotic, on to professional work and on to the human relations connected with it lends it a value by no means second to what it enjoys as something indispensible to the preservation and justification of existence in society. Professional activity is a source of special satisfaction if it is a freely chosen one - if, that is to say, by means of sublimation, it makes possible the use of existing inclinations, of persisting or constitutionally reinforced instinctual impulses. And yet, as a path to happiness, work is not highly prized by men. They do not strive after it as they do after other possibilities of satisfaction. The great majority of people only work under the stress of necessity, and this natural human aversion to work raises most difficult social problems.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4480  
 
   While this procedure already clearly shows an intention of making oneself independent of the external 
world by seeking satisfaction in internal, psychical pr ocesses, the next procedure brings out those features 
yet more strongly. In it, the connection with reality is still further loosened; satisfaction is obtained from 
illusions, which are recognized as such without the discrepancy between them and reality being allowed to interfere with enjoyment. The region from which these illusions arise is the life of the imagination; at the 
time when the development of the sense of reality took place, this region was expressly exempted from the demands of reality-testing and was set apart for the purpose of fulfilling wishes which were difficult to carry out. At the head of these satisfactions through phantasy stands the enjoyment of works of art - an 
enjoyment which, by the agency of the artist, is m ade accessible even to those who are not themselves 
creative.¹ People who are receptive to the influence of art cannot set too high a value on it as a source of 
pleasure and consolation in life. Nevertheless the mild narcosis induced in us by art can do no more than bring about a transient withdrawal from the pressure of vital needs, and it is not strong enough to make us 
forget real misery.    Another procedure operates more energetically and more thoroughly. It regards reality as the sole enemy and as the source of all suffering, with which it is impossible to live, so that one must break off all relations 
with it if one is to be in any way happy. The hermit turns his back on the world and will have no truck with it. 
But one can do more than that; one can try to re-create the world, to build up in its stead another world in which its most unbearable features are eliminated and repl aced by others that are in conformity with one’s 
own wishes. But whoever, in desperate defiance, sets out upon this path to happiness will as a rule attain nothing. Reality is too strong for him. He becomes a madman, who for the most part finds no one to help him in carrying through his delusion. It is asserted, however, that each one of us behaves in some one 
respect like a paranoic, corrects some aspect of the wo rld which is unbearable to him by the construction of 
a wish and introduces this delusion into reality. A special importance attaches to the case in which this 
attempt to procure a certainty of happiness and a protection against suffering through a delusional remoulding of reality is made by a considerable number of people in common. The religions of mankind 
must be classed among the mass delusions of this kind. No one, needless to say, who shares a delusion 
ever recognizes it as such.  
   ¹ Cf. ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of Mental Functioning’ (1911 b), and Lecture XXIII of my Introductory 
Lectures (1916-17).  
Civilization And Its Discontents4481  
 
   I do not think that I have made a complete enumeration of the methods by which men strive to gain 
happiness and keep suffering away and I know, too, that the material might have been differently arranged. 
One procedure I have not yet mentioned - not because I have forgotten it but because it will concern us later in another connection. And how could one possibly forget, of all others, this technique in the art of living? It is conspicuous for a most remarkable combination of characteristic features. It, too, aims of course 
at making the subject independent of Fate (as it is best to call it), and to that end it locates satisfaction in internal mental processes, making use, in so doing, of the displaceability of the libido of which we have already spoken. But it does not turn away from the external world; on the contrary, it clings to the objects 
belonging to that world and obtains happiness from an emotional relationship to them. Nor is it content to 
aim at an avoidance of unpleasure - a goal, as we might call it, of weary resignation; it passes this by without heed and holds fast to the original, passionate striving for a positive fulfilment of happiness. And 
perhaps it does in fact come nearer to this goal than any other method. I am, of course, speaking of the 
way of life which makes love the centre of everything, which looks for all satisfaction in loving and being loved. A psychical attitude of this sort comes naturally enough to all of us; one of the forms in which love manifests itself - sexual love - has given us our mo st intense experience of an overwhelming sensation of 
pleasure and has thus furnished us with a pattern for our search for happiness. What is more natural than that we should persist in looking for happiness along the path on which we first encountered it? The weak 
side of this technique of living is easy to see; otherwise no human being would have thought of abandoning 
this path to happiness for any other. It is that we are never so defenceless against suffering as when we 
love, never so helplessly unhappy as when we have lost our loved object or its love. But this does not dispose of the technique of living based on the value of love as a means to happiness. There is much more 
to be said about it. 
   We may go on from here to consider the interesting case in which happiness in life is predominantly sought in the enjoyment of beauty, wherever beauty presents itself to our senses and our judgement - the beauty of human forms and gestures, of natural objects and landscapes and of artistic and even scientific 
creations. This aesthetic attitude to the goal of life offers little protection against the threat of suffering, but it 
can compensate for a great deal. The enjoyment of beauty has a peculiar, mildly intoxicating quality of feeling. Beauty has no obvious use; nor is there any clear cultural necessity for it. Yet civilization could not 
do without it. The science of aesthetics investigates the conditions under which things are felt as beautiful, 
but it has been unable to give any explanation of the nature and origin of beauty, and, as usually happens, lack of success is concealed beneath a flood of resounding and empty words. Psycho-analysis, 
unfortunately, has scarcely anything to say about beauty either. All that seems certain is its derivation from 
the field of sexual feeling. The love of beauty seems a perfect example of an impulse inhibited in its aim. ‘Beauty’ and ‘attraction’ are originally attributes of the sexual object. It is worth remarking that the genitals 
themselves, the sight of which is always exciting, are nevertheless hardly ever judged to be beautiful; the 
quality of beauty seems, instead, to attach to certain secondary sexual characters.   
Civilization And Its Discontents4482  
 
   In spite of the incompleteness, I will venture on a few remarks as a conclusion to our enquiry. The 
programme of becoming happy, which the pleasure principle imposes on us, cannot be fulfilled; yet we 
must not - indeed, we cannot - give up our efforts to bring it nearer to fulfilment by some means or other. Very different paths may be taken in that direction, and we may give priority either to the positive aspect of 
the aim, that of gaining pleasure, or to its negative one, that of avoiding unpleasure. By none of these paths 
can we attain all that we desire. Happiness, in the reduced sense in which we recognize it as possible, is a problem of the economics of the individual’s libido. There is no golden rule which applies to everyone: every man must find out for himself in what particular fashion he can be saved. All kinds of different factors will 
operate to direct his choice. It is a question of how much real satisfaction he can expect to get from the 
external world, how far he is led to make himself independent of it, and, finally, how much strength he feels he has for altering the world to suit his wishes. In this, his psychical constitution will play a decisive part, 
irrespectively of the external circumstances. The man who is predominantly erotic will give first preference 
to his emotional relationships to other people; the narcissistic man, who inclines to be self-sufficient, will 
seek his main satisfactions in his internal mental processes; the man of action will never give up the external world on which he can try out his strength. As  regards the second of these types, the nature of his 
talents and the amount of instinctual sublimation open to him will decide where he shall locate his interests. Any choice that is pushed to an extreme will be penalized by exposing the individual to the dangers which arise if a technique of living that has been chosen as an exclusive one should prove inadequate. Just as a 
cautious business-man avoids tying up all his capital in one concern, so, perhaps, worldly wisdom will 
advise us not to look for the whole of our satisfaction from a single aspiration. Its success is never certain, for that depends on the convergence of many factors, perhaps on none more than on the capacity of the 
psychical constitution to adapt its function to the environment and then to exploit that environment for a 
yield of pleasure. A person who is born with a spec ially unfavourable instinctual constitution, and who has 
not properly undergone the transformation and rearrangement of his libidinal components which is 
indispensable for later achievements, will find it hard to obtain happiness from his external situation, 
especially if he is faced with tasks of some difficulty. As a last technique of living, which will at least bring 
him substitutive satisfactions, he is offered that of a flight into neurotic illness - a flight which he usually 
accomplishes when he is still young. The man who sees his pursuit of happiness come to nothing in later 
years can still find consolation in the yield of pleasure of chronic intoxication; or he can embark on the 
desperate attempt at rebellion seen in a psychosis.¹  
   ¹ I feel impelled to point out one at least of the gaps that have been left in the account given above. No discussion of 
the possibilities of human happiness should omit to take into consideration the relation between narcissism and object libido. We require to know what being essentially self-dependent signifies for the economics of the libido.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4483  
 
   Religion restricts this play of choice and adaptati on, since it imposes equally on everyone its own path to 
the acquisition of happiness and protection from suffering. Its technique consists in depressing the value of 
life and distorting the picture of the real world in a delusional manner - which presupposes an intimidation of 
the intelligence. At this price, by forcibly fixing them  in a state of psychical infantilism and by drawing them 
into a mass-delusion, religion succeeds in sparing many people an individual neurosis. But hardly anything 
more. There are, as we have said, many paths which may lead to such happiness as is attainable by men, 
but there is none which does so for certain. Even relig ion cannot keep its promise. If the believer finally 
sees himself obliged to speak of God’s ‘inscrutable decrees’, he is admitting that all that is left to him as a last possible consolation and source of pleasure in his suffering is an unconditional submission. And if he is 
prepared for that, he could probably have spared himself the détour  he has made. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4484  
 
III 
 
Our enquiry concerning happiness has not so far taught us much that is not already common knowledge. And even if we proceed from it to the problem of why it is so hard for men to be happy, there seems no greater prospect of learning anything new. We have given the answer already by pointing to the three 
sources from which our suffering comes: the superior power of nature, the feebleness of our own bodies 
and the inadequacy of the regulations which adjust the mutual relation ships of human beings in the family, the state and society. In regard to the first two sources, our judgement cannot hesitate long. It forces us to 
acknowledge those sources of suffering and to submit to the inevitable. We shall never completely master 
nature; and our bodily organism, itself a part of that nature, will always remain a transient structure with a limited capacity for adaptation and achievement. This recognition does not have a paralysing effect. On the 
contrary, it points the direction for our activity. If we cannot remove all suffering, we can remove some, and 
we can mitigate some: the experience of many thousands of years has convinced us of that. As regards the 
third source, the social source of suffering, our attitude is a different one. We do not admit it at all; we cannot see why the regulations made by ourselves  should not, on the contrary, be a protection and a 
benefit for every one of us. And yet, when we consider how unsuccessful we have been in precisely this field of prevention of suffering, a suspicion dawns on us that here, too, a piece of unconquerable nature 
may lie behind it - this time a piece of our own psychical constitution. 
   When we start considering this possibility, we come upon a contention which is so astonishing that we 
must dwell upon it. This contention holds that what we call our civilization is largely responsible for our misery, and that we should be much happier if we gave it up and returned to primitive conditions. I call this 
contention astonishing because, in whatever way we may define the concept of civilization, it is a certain 
fact that all the things with which we seek to protect ourselves against the threats that emanate from the 
sources of suffering are part of that very civilization.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4485  
 
   How has it happened that so many people have come to take up this strange attitude of hostility to 
civilization? I believe that the basis of it was a deep and long-standing dissatisfaction with the then existing 
state of civilization and that on that basis a condemnati on of it was built up, occasioned by certain specific 
historical events. I think I know what the last and the last but one of those occasions were. I am not learned 
enough to trace the chain of them far back enough in the history of the human species; but a factor of this 
kind hostile to civilization must already have been at work in the victory of Christendom over the heathen 
religions. For it was very closely related to the low estimation put upon earthly life by the Christian doctrine. The last but one of these occasions was when the progress of voyages of discovery led to contact with 
primitive peoples and races. In consequence of insufficient observation and a mistaken view of their 
manners and customs, they appeared to Europeans to be leading a simple, happy life with few wants, a life such as was unattainable by their visitors with their superior civilization. Later experience has corrected 
some of those judgements. In many cases the observers had wrongly attributed to the absence of 
complicated cultural demands what was in fact due to the bounty of nature and the ease with which the major human needs were satisfied. The last occasion is especially familiar to us. It arose when people came to know about the mechanism of the neuroses, which threaten to undermine the modicum of 
happiness enjoyed by civilized men. It was discovered that a person becomes neurotic because he cannot 
tolerate the amount of frustration which society imposes on him in the service of its cultural ideals, and it was inferred from this that the abolition or reduction of those demands would result in a return to 
possibilities of happiness. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4486  
 
   There is also an added factor of disappointment. During the last few generations mankind has made an 
extraordinary advance in the natural sciences and in their technical application and has established his 
control over nature in a way never before imagined. The single steps of this advance are common 
knowledge and it is unnecessary to enumerate them. Men are proud of those achievements, and have a 
right to be. But they seem to have observed that  this newly-won power over space and time, this 
subjugation of the forces of nature, which is the fulfilment of a longing that goes back thousands of years, has not increased the amount of pleasurable satisfacti on which they may expect from life and has not made 
them feel happier. From the recognition of this fact we ought to be content to conclude that power over 
nature is not the only precondition of human happiness, just as it is not the only goal of cultural endeavour; 
we ought not to infer from it that technical progress is without value for the economics of our happiness. One would like to ask: is there, then, no positive gai n in pleasure, no unequivocal increase in my feeling of 
happiness, if I can, as often as I please, hear the vo ice of a child of mine who is living hundreds of miles 
away or if I can learn in the shortest possible time after a friend has reached his destination that he has come through the long and difficult voyage unharmed? Does it mean nothing that medicine has succeeded in enormously reducing infant mortality and the danger of infection for women in childbirth, and, indeed, in 
considerably lengthening the average life of a civilized man? And there is a long list that might be Added to 
benefits of this kind which we owe to the much-despi sed era of scientific and technical advances. But here 
the voice of pessimistic criticism makes itself heard and wa rns us that most of these satisfactions follow the 
model of the ‘cheap enjoyment’ extolled in the anecdote - the enjoyment obtained by putting a bare leg from under the bedclothes on a cold winter night and drawing it in again. If there had been no railway to conquer distances, my child would never have left his native town and I should need no telephone to hear his voice; 
if travelling across the ocean by ship had not been in troduced, my friend would not have embarked on his 
sea-voyage and I should not need a cable to relieve my anxiety about him. What is the use of reducing 
infantile mortality when it is precisely that reducti on which imposes the greatest restraint on us in the 
begetting of children, so that, taken all round, we nevertheless rear no more children than in the days before the reign of hygiene, while at the same time we have created difficult conditions for our sexual life in 
marriage, and have probably worked against the beneficial effects of natural selection? And, finally, what good to us is a long life if it is difficult and barren of joys, and if it is so full of misery that we can only 
welcome death as a deliverer? 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4487  
 
   It seems certain that we do not feel comfortable in our  present-day civilization, but it is very difficult to 
form an opinion whether and in what degree men of an earlier age felt happier and what part their cultural 
conditions played in the matter. We shall always tend to consider people’s distress objectively - that is, to place ourselves, with our own wants and sensibilities, in their conditions, and then to examine what 
occasions we should find in them for experiencing happiness or unhappiness. This method of looking at 
things, which seems objective because it ignores the variations in subjective sensibility, is, of course, the 
most subjective possible, since it puts one’s own ment al states in the place of any others, unknown though 
they may be. Happiness, however, is something essentially subjective. No matter how much we may shrink 
with horror from certain situations - of a galley-slave in antiquity, of a peasant during the Thirty Years’ War, 
of a victim of the Holy Inquisition, of a Jew awaiting a pogrom - it is nevertheless impossible for us to feel our way into such people - to divine the changes which original obtuseness of mind, a gradual stupefying 
process, the cessation of expectations, and cruder or more refined methods of narcotization have produced 
upon their receptivity to sensations of pleasure and unpleas ure. Moreover, in the case of the most extreme 
possibility of suffering, special mental protective devices are brought into operation. It seems to me unprofitable to pursue this aspect of the problem any further. 
   It is time for us to turn our attention to the nature of this civilization on whose value as a means to 
happiness doubts have been thrown. We shall not look for a formula in which to express that nature in a few words, until we have learned something by examini ng it. We shall therefore content ourselves with 
saying once more that the word ‘civilization’ de scribes the whole sum of the achievements and the 
regulations which distinguish our lives from those of our animal ancestors and which serve two purposes - 
namely to protect men against nature and to adjust their mutual relations.¹ In order to learn more, we will 
bring together the various features of civilization i ndividually, as they are exhibited in human communities. 
In doing so, we shall have no hesitation in letting ourselves be guided by linguistic usage or, as it is also 
called, linguistic feeling, in the conviction that we s hall thus be doing justice to inner discernments which still 
defy expression in abstract terms. 
 
   ¹ See The Future of an Illusion  (1927 c).  
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4488  
 
   The first stage is easy. We recognize as cultural all activities and resources which are useful to men for 
making the earth serviceable to them, for protecting them against the violence of the forces of nature, and 
so on. As regards this side of civilization, there can be scarcely any doubt. If we go back far enough, we find that the first acts of civilization were the us e of tools, the gaining of control over fire and the 
construction of dwellings. Among these, the control over fire stands out as a quite extraordinary and 
unexampled achievement,¹ while the others opened up paths  which man has followed ever since, and the 
stimulus to which is easily guessed. With every tool man is perfecting his own organs, whether motor or sensory, or is removing the limits to their functioning. Motor power places gigantic forces at his disposal, 
which, like his muscles, he can employ in any direction; thanks to ships and aircraft neither water nor air 
can hinder his movements; by means of spectacles he corrects defects in the lens of his own eye; by means of the telescope he sees into the far distance; and by means of the microscope he overcomes the 
limits of visibility set by the structure of his retina. In the photographic camera he has created an instrument 
which retains the fleeting visual impressions, just as a gramophone disc retains the equally fleeting auditory ones; both are at bottom materializations of the power he possesses of recollection, his memory. With the help of the telephone he can hear at distances which would be respected as unattainable even in a fairy 
tale. Writing was in its origin the voice of an absent person; and the dwelling-house was a substitute for the 
mother’s womb, the first lodging, for which in all likelihood man still longs, and in which he was safe and felt at ease. 
 
   ¹ Psycho-analytic material, incomplete as it is and not susceptible to clear interpretation, nevertheless admits of a 
conjecture - a fantastic sounding one - about the origin of this human feat. It is as though primal man had the habit, 
when he came in contact with fire, or satisfying an infantile desire connected with it, by putting it out with a stream of his urine. The legends that we possess leave no doubt about the originally phallic view taken of tongues of flame as they shoot upwards. Putting out fire by micturating - a theme to which modern giants, Gulliver in Lilliput and Rabelais’ Gargantua, still hark back - was therefore a kind of sexual act with a male, an enjoyment of sexual potency in a homosexual competition. The first person to renounce this desire and spare the fire was able to carry it off with him and subdue it to his own use. By damping down the fire of his own sexual excitation, he had tamed the natural force of fire. This great cultural conquest was thus the reward for his renunciation of instinct. Further, it is as though woman had been appointed guardian of the fire which was held captive on the domestic hearth, because her anatomy made it impossible for her to yield to the temptation of this desire. It is remarkable, too, how regularly analytic experience testifies to the connection between ambition, fire and urethral erotism.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4489  
 
   These things that, by his science and technology, man has brought about on this earth, on which he first 
appeared as a feeble animal organism and on which each individual of his species must once more make 
its entry (‘oh inch of nature!’) as a helpless suckling - these things do not only sound like a fairy tale, they are an actual fulfilment of every - or of almost every - fairy-tale wish. All these assets he may lay claim to as his cultural acquisition. Long ago he formed an ideal conception of omnipotence and omniscience which he 
embodied in his gods. To these gods he attributed everything that seemed unattainable to his wishes, or 
that was forbidden to him. One may say, therefore, that these gods were cultural ideals. To-day he has come very close to the attainment of this ideal, he has almost become a god himself. Only, it is true, in the 
fashion in which ideals are usually attained according to the general judgement of humanity. Not 
completely; in some respects not at all, in others only half way. Man has, as it were, become a kind of prosthetic God. When he puts on all his auxiliary organs he is truly magnificent; but those organs have not 
grown on to him and they still give him much trouble at times. Nevertheless, he is entitled to console 
himself with the thought that this development will not come to an end precisely with the year 1930 A.D. Future ages will bring with them new and probably unimaginably great advances in this field of civilization and will increase man’s likeness to God still more. But in the interests of our investigations, we will not 
forget that present-day man does not feel happy in his Godlike character. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4490  
 
   We recognize, then, that countries have attained a high level of civilization if we find that in them 
everything which can assist in the exploitation of t he earth by man and in his protection against the forces 
of nature - everything, in short, which is of use to him - is attended to and effectively carried out. In such 
countries rivers which threaten to flood the land are regulated in their flow, and their water is directed through canals to places where there is a shortage of it. The soil is carefully cultivated and planted with the 
vegetation which it is suited to support; and the mineral wealth below ground is assiduously brought to the surface and fashioned into the required implements and utensils. The means of communication are ample, rapid and reliable. Wild and dangerous animals have been exterminated, and the breeding of domesticated 
animals flourishes. But we demand other things from ci vilization besides these, and it is a noticeable fact 
that we hope to find them realized in these same c ountries. As though we were seeking to repudiate the 
first demand we made, we welcome it as a sign of civilization as well if we see people directing their care too to what has no practical value whatever, to what is useless - if, for instance, the green spaces 
necessary in a town as playgrounds and as reservoirs of fresh air are also laid out with flower-beds, or if the windows of the houses are decorated with pots of flower s. We soon observe that this useless thing which 
we expect civilization to value is beauty. We require civilized man to reverence beauty wherever he sees it 
in nature and to create it in the objects of his handiwork so far as he is able. But this is far from exhausting 
our demands on civilization. We expect besides to see the signs of cleanliness and order. We do not think highly of the cultural level of an English country town in Shakespeare’s time when we read that there was a 
big dung heap in front of his father’s house in Stratford; we are indignant and call it ‘barbarous’ (which is the 
opposite of civilized) when we find the paths in the Wiener Wald littered with paper. Dirtiness of any kind seems to us incompatible with civilization. We extend our demand for cleanliness to the human body too. 
We are astonished to learn of the objectionable smell which emanated from the Roi Soleil; and we shake 
our heads on the Isola Bella when we are shown the tiny wash-basin in which Napoleon made his morning 
toilet. Indeed, we are not surprised by the idea of setting up the use of soap as an actual yardstick of civilization. The same is true of order. It, like cleanliness, applies solely to the works of man. But whereas 
cleanliness is not to be expected in nature, order, on the contrary, has been imitated from her. Man’s 
observation of the great astronomical regularities not only furnished him with a model for introducing order into his life, but gave him the first points of departure for doing so. Order is a kind of compulsion to repeat 
which, when a regulation has been laid down once and for all, decides when, where and how a thing shall 
be done, so that in every similar circumstance one is spared hesitation and indecision. The benefits of order are incontestable. It enables men to use space and time to the best advantage, while conserving their 
psychical forces. We should have a right to expect that  order would have taken its place in human activities 
from the start and without difficulty; and we may well wonder that this has not happened - that, on the contrary, human beings exhibit an inborn tendency to carelessness, irregularity and unreliability in their 
work, and that a laborious training is needed before they learn to follow the example of their celestial 
models.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4491  
 
   Beauty, cleanliness and order obviously occupy a s pecial position among the requirements of civilization. 
No one will maintain that they are as important for life as  control over the forces of nature or as some other 
factors with which we shall become acquainted. And yet no one would care to put them in the background 
as trivialities. That civilization is not exclusively ta ken up with what is useful is already shown by the 
example of beauty, which we decline to omit from among the interests of civilization. The usefulness of 
order is quite evident. With regard to cleanliness, we must bear in mind that it is demanded of us by 
hygiene as well, and we may suspect that even befor e the days of scientific prophylaxis the connection 
between the two was not altogether strange to man. Ye t utility does not entirely explain these efforts; 
something else must be at work besides.    No feature, however, seems better to characte rize civilization than its esteem and encouragement of 
man’s higher mental activities - his intellectual, scientific and artistic achievements and the leading role that 
it assigns to ideas in human life. Foremost among those ideas are the religious systems, on whose 
complicated structure I have endeavoured to throw light elsewhere. Next come the speculations of philosophy; and finally what might be called man’s ‘ideals’ - his ideas of a possible perfection of individuals, or of peoples or of the whole of humanity, and the dem ands he sets up on the basis of such ideas. The fact 
that these creations of his are not independent of one another, but are on the contrary closely interwoven, increases the difficulty not only of describing them but of tracing their psychological derivation. If we assume quite generally that the motive force of all human activities is a striving towards the two confluent 
goals of utility and a yield of pleasure, we must suppose that this is also true of the manifestations of 
civilization which we have been discussing here, although this is easily visible only in scientific and 
aesthetic activities. But it cannot be doubted that the other activities, too, correspond to strong needs in 
men - perhaps to needs which are only developed in a minority. Nor must we allow ourselves to be misled 
by judgements of value concerning any particular religion, or philosophic system, or ideal. Whether we think to find in them the highest achievements of the human spirit, or whether we deplore them as aberrations, we cannot but recognize that where they are present, and, in especial, where they are dominant, a high 
level of civilization is implied. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4492  
 
   The last, but certainly not the least important, of the characteristic features of civilization remains to be 
assessed: the manner in which the relationships of men to one another, their social relationships, are 
regulated - relationships which affect a person as a neighbour, as a source of help, as another person’s 
sexual object, as a member of a family and of a State. Here it is especially difficult to keep clear of particular ideal demands and to see what is civilized in general. Perhaps we may begin by explaining that 
the element of civilization enters on the scene with the fi rst attempt to regulate these social relationships. If 
the attempt were not made, the relationships would be subject to the arbitrary will of the individual: that is to 
say, the physically stronger man would decide them in the sense of his own interests and instinctual 
impulses. Nothing would be changed in this if this stronger man should in his turn meet someone even 
stronger than he. Human life in common is only made possible when a majority comes together which is stronger than any separate individual and which remains united against all separate individuals. The power 
of this community is then set up as ‘right’ in opposit ion to the power of the individual, which is condemned 
as ‘brute force’. This replacement of the power of t he individual by the power of a community constitutes the 
decisive step of civilization. The essence of it lies in the fact that the members of the community restrict 
themselves in their possibilities of satisfaction, whereas the individual knew no such restrictions. The first 
requisite of civilization, therefore, is that of justic e - that is, the assurance that a law once made will not be 
broken in favour of an individual. This implies nothing as to the ethical value of such a law. The further 
course of cultural development seems to tend towards making the law no longer an expression of the will of 
a small community - a caste or a stratum of the population or a racial group - which, in its turn, behaves like 
a violent individual towards other, and perhaps more numerous, collections of people. The final outcome should be a rule of law to which all - except those who are not capable of entering a community - have 
contributed by a sacrifice of their instincts, and which leaves no one - again with the same exception - at the 
mercy of brute force.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4493  
 
   The liberty of the individual is no gift of civilization. It was greatest before there was any civilization, 
though then, it is true, it had for the most part no value, since the individual was scarcely in a position to 
defend it. The development of civilization imposes rest rictions on it, and justice demands that no one shall 
escape those restrictions. What makes itself felt in a human community as a desire for freedom may be their revolt against some existing injustice, and so may prove favourable to a further development of 
civilization; it may remain compatible with civilization. But it may also spring from the remains of their 
original personality, which is still untamed by civilization and may thus become the basis in them of hostility to civilization. The urge for freedom, therefore, is directed against particular forms and demands of 
civilization or against civilization altogether. It does not seem as though any influence could induce a man 
to change his nature into a termite’s. No doubt he will always defend his claim to individual liberty against the will of the group. A good part of the struggles of mankind centre round the single task of finding an 
expedient accommodation - one, that is, that will bring happiness - between this claim of the individual and 
the cultural claims of the group; and one of the problems that touches the fate of humanity is whether such 
an accommodation can be reached by means of some particula r form of civilization or whether this conflict 
is irreconcilable. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4494  
 
   By allowing common feeling to be our guide in deciding what features of human life are to be regarded as 
civilized, we have obtained a clear impression of the general picture of civilization; but it is true that so far 
we have discovered nothing that is not universally known. At the same time we have been careful not to fall 
in with the prejudice that civilization is synonymous with perfecting, that it is the road to perfection pre-ordained for men. But now a point of view presents itself which may lead in a different direction. The 
development of civilization appears to us as a peculiar process which mankind undergoes, and in which 
several things strike us as familiar. We may characterize this process with reference to the changes which it brings about in the familiar instinctual dispositions of human beings, to satisfy which is, after all, the 
economic task of our lives. A few of these instincts are used up in such a manner that something appears in 
their place which, in an individual, we describe as a character-trait. The most remarkable example of such a process is found in the anal erotism of young human beings. Their original interest in the excretory function, 
its organs and products, is changed in the course of their growth into a group of traits which are familiar to 
us as parsimony, a sense of order and cleanliness - qualities which, though valuable and welcome in themselves, may be intensified till they become markedly dominant and produce what is called the anal character. How this happens we do not know, but there is no doubt about the correctness of the finding.¹ 
Now we have seen that order and cleanliness are important requirements of civilization, although their vital 
necessity is not very apparent, any more than their suitability as sources of enjoyment. At this point we cannot fail to be struck by the similarity between the pr ocess of civilization and the libidinal development of 
the individual. Other instincts are induced to displace the conditions for their satisfaction, to lead them into other paths. In most cases this process coincides with that of the sublimation (of instinctual aims) with 
which we are familiar, but in some it can be differentiated from it. Sublimation of instinct is an especially 
conspicuous feature of cultural development; it is what makes it possible for higher psychical activities, 
scientific, artistic or ideological, to play such an important part in civilized life. If one were to yield to a first impression, one would say that sublimation is a vicissitude which has been forced upon the instincts entirely by civilization. But it would be wiser to reflect upon this a little longer. In the third place, finally, and 
this seems the most important of all, it is impossible to overlook the extent to which civilization is built up 
upon a renunciation of instinct, how much it presupposes precisely the non-satisfaction (by suppression, repression or some other means?) of powerful instincts. This ‘cultural frustration’ dominates the large field 
of social relationships between human beings. As we alr eady know, it is the cause of the hostility against 
which all civilizations have to struggle. It will also make severe demands on our scientific work, and we shall 
have much to explain here. It is not easy to understand how it can become possible to deprive an instinct of 
satisfaction. Nor is doing so without danger. If the loss is not compensated for economically, one can be 
certain that serious disorders will ensue.    But if we want to know what value can be attributed to our view that the development of civilization is a 
special process, comparable to the normal maturation of the individual, we must clearly attack another 
problem. We must ask ourselves to what influences the development of civilization owes its origin, how it arose, and by what its course has been determined.  
   ¹ Cf. my ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908 b), and numerous further contributions, by Ernest Jones and others. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4495  
 
IV 
 
The task seems an immense one, and it is natural to feel diffidence in the face of it. But here are such conjectures as I have been able to make.    After primal man had discovered that it lay in his own hands, literally, to improve his lot on earth by 
working, it cannot have been a matter of indifference to him whether another man worked with or against 
him. The other man acquired the value for him of a fellow-worker, with whom it was useful to live together. Even earlier, in his ape-like prehistory, man had adopted the habit of forming families, and the members of 
his family were probably his first helpers. One may suppose that the founding of families was connected 
with the fact that a moment came when the need for genital satisfaction no longer made its appearance like a guest who drops in suddenly, and, after his departure, is heard of no more for a long time, but instead 
took up its quarters as a permanent lodger. When this happened, the male acquired a motive for keeping 
the female, or, speaking more generally, his sexual objects, near him; while the female, who did not want to be separated from her helpless young, was obliged, in their interests, to remain with the stronger male.¹ In this primitive family one essential feature of civilizat ion is still lacking. The arbitrary will of its head, the 
father, was unrestricted. In Totem and Taboo  I have tried to show how the way led from this family to the 
succeeding stage of communal life in the form of bands of brothers. In overpowering their father, the sons had made the discovery that a combination can be stronger than a single individual. The totemic culture is 
based on the restrictions which the sons had to impos e on one another in order to keep this new state of 
affairs in being. The taboo-observances were the first ‘right’ or ‘law. The communal life of human beings 
had, therefore, a two-fold foundation: the compulsion to work, which was created by external necessity, and 
the power of love, which made the man unwilling to be deprived of his sexual object - the woman -, and 
made the woman unwilling to be deprived of the part of herself which had been separated off from her - her child. Eros and Ananke have become the parents of human civilization too. The first result of civilization was that even a fairly large number of people were now able to live together in a community. And since 
these two great powers were co-operating in this, one might expect that the further development of 
civilization would proceed smoothly towards an even better control over the external world and towards a further extension of the number of people included in the community. Nor is it easy to understand how this 
civilization could act upon its participants otherwise than to make them happy. 
 
   ¹ The organic periodicity of the sexual process has persisted, it is true, but its effect on psychical sexual excitation has 
rather been reversed. This change seems most likely to be connected with the diminution of the olfactory stimuli by means of which the menstrual process produced an effect on the male psyche. Their role was taken over by visual excitations, which, in contrast to the intermittent olfactory stimuli, were able to maintain a permanent effect. The taboo on menstruation is derived from this ‘organic repression’, as a defence against a phase of development that has been 
surmounted. All other motives are probably of a secondary nature. (Cf. C. D. Daly, 1927.) This process is repeated on 
another level when the gods of a superseded period of civilization turn into demons. The diminution of the olfactory stimuli seems itself to be a consequence of man’s raising himself from the ground, of his assumption of an upright gait; this made his genitals, which were previously concealed, visible and in need of protection, and so provoked feelings of shame in him.    The fateful process of civilization would thus have set in with man’s adoption of an erect posture. From that point the chain of events would have proceeded through the devaluation of olfactory stimuli and the isolation of the menstrual period to the time when visual stimuli were paramount and the genitals became visible, and thence to the continuity of sexual excitation, the founding of the family and so to the threshold of human civilization. This is only a theoretical speculation, but it is important enough to deserve careful checking with reference to the conditions of life which obtain among animals closely related to man.    A social factor is also unmistakably present in the cultural trend towards cleanliness, which has received ex post facto  
justification in hygienic considerations but which manifested itself before their discovery. The incitement to cleanliness originates in an urge to get rid of the excreta, which have become disagreeable to the sense perceptions. We know that in the nursery things are different. The excreta arouse no disgust in children. They seem valuable to them as being a part of their own body which has come away from it. Here upbringing insists with special energy on hastening the course of development which lies ahead, and which should make the excreta worthless, disgusting, abhorrent and abominable. Such a reversal of values would scarcely be possible if the substances that are expelled from the body were not doomed by their strong smells to share the fate which overtook olfactory stimuli after man adopted the erect posture. Anal erotism, therefore, succumbs in the first instance to the ‘organic repression’ which paved the way to civilization. The existence of the social factor which is responsible for the further transformation of anal erotism is attested by the circumstance that, in spite of all man’s developmental advances, he scarcely finds the smell of his own  
excreta repulsive, but only that of other people’s. Thus a person who is not clean - who does not hide his excreta - is offending other people; he is showing no consideration for them. And this is confirmed by our strongest and commonest terms of abuse. It would be incomprehensible, too, that man should use the name of his most faithful friend in the animal world - the dog - as a term of abuse if that creature had not incurred his contempt through two characteristics: 
Civilization And Its Discontentsthat it is an animal whose dominant sense is that of smell and one which has no horror of excrement, and that it is not 
ashamed of its sexual functions. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4496  
 
   Before we go on to enquire from what quarter an interference might arise, this recognition of love as one 
of the foundations of civilization may serve as an excuse for a digression which will enable us to fill in a gap 
which we left in an earlier discussion. We said there that man’s discovery that sexual (genital) love afforded him the strongest experiences of satisfaction, and in fa ct provided him with the prototype of all happiness, 
must have suggested to him that he should continue to seek the satisfaction of happiness in his life along 
the path of sexual relations and that he should make genita l erotism the central point of his life. We went on 
to say that in doing so he made himself dependent in a most dangerous way on a portion of the external world, namely, his chosen love-object, and exposed himself to extreme suffering if he should be rejected by 
that object or should lose it through unfaithfulness or death. For that reason the wise men of every age 
have warned us most emphatically against this way of life; but  in spite of this it has not lost its attraction for 
a great number of people. 
   A small minority are enabled by their constitution to find happiness, in spite of everything, along the path 
of love. But far-reaching mental changes in the function of love are necessary before this can happen. These people make themselves independent of their object’s acquiescence by displacing what they mainly value from being loved on to loving; they protect themse lves against the loss of the object by directing their 
love, not to single objects but to all men alike; and they avoid the uncertainties and disappointments of 
genital love by turning away from its sexual aims and transforming the instinct into an impulse with an inhibited aim . What they bring about in themselves in this way is a state of evenly suspended, steadfast, 
affectionate feeling, which has little external resemblance any more to the stormy agitations of genital love, from which it is nevertheless derived. Perhaps St. Francis of Assisi went furthest in thus exploiting love for the benefit of an inner feeling of happiness. Moreover , what we have recognized as one of the techniques 
for fulfilling the pleasure principle has often been brought into connection with religion; this connection may lie in the remote regions where the distinction between the ego and objects or between objects themselves is neglected. According to one ethical view, whose deeper motivation will become clear to us presently, this readiness for a universal love of mankind and the world represents the highest standpoint which man can 
reach. Even at this early stage of the discussion I should like to bring forward my two main objections to this 
view. A love that does not discriminate seems to me to forfeit a part of its own value, by doing an injustice to its object; and secondly, not all men are worthy of love. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4497  
 
   The love which founded the family continues to operate in civilization both in its original form, in which it 
does not renounce direct sexual satisfaction, and in its modified form as aim-inhibited affection. In each, it 
continues to carry on its function of binding together considerable numbers of people, and it does so in a more intensive fashion than can be effected through the interest of work in common. The careless way in which language uses the word ‘love’ has its genetic justif ication. People give the name ‘love’ to the relation 
between a man and a woman whose genital needs have led them to found a family; but they also give the name ‘love’ to the positive feelings between parents and children, and between the brothers and sisters of a family, although we  are obliged to describe this as ‘aim-inhibited love’ or ‘affection’. Love with an inhibited 
aim was in fact originally fully sensual love, and it is so still in man’s unconscious. Both - fully sensual love and aim-inhibited love - extend outside the family and create new bonds with people who before were strangers. Genital love leads to the formation of new families, and aim-inhibited love to ‘friendships’ which 
become valuable from a cultural standpoint because they escape some of the limitations of genital love, as, 
for instance, its exclusiveness. But in the course of development the relation of love to civilization loses its unambiguity. On the one hand love comes into opposition to the interests of civilization; on the other, civilization threatens love with substantial restrictions. 
   This rift between them seems unavoidable. The reason for it is not immediately recognizable. It expresses 
itself at first as a conflict between the family and the larger community to which the individual belongs. We have already perceived that one of the main endeavours of civilization is to bring people together into large 
unities. But the family will not give the individual up. The more closely the members of a family are attached 
to one another, the more often do they tend to cut themselves off from others, and the more difficult is it for them to enter into the wider circle of life. The m ode of life in common which is phylogenetically the older, 
and which is the only one that exists in childhood, will not let itself be superseded by the cultural mode of life which has been acquired later. Detaching himself from his family becomes a task that faces every young person, and society often helps him in the solution of it by means of puberty and initiation rites. We get the impression that these are difficulties which are inherent in all psychical - and, indeed, at bottom, in 
all organic - development. 
   Furthermore, women soon come into opposition to civilization and display their retarding and restraining influence - those very women who, in the beginning, laid the foundations of civilization by the claims of their 
love. Women represent the interests of the family and of sexual life. The work of civilization has become increasingly the business of men, it confronts them with ever more difficult tasks and compels them to carry out instinctual sublimations of which women ar e little capable. Since a man does not have unlimited 
quantities of psychical energy at his disposal, he has to accomplish his tasks by making an expedient distribution of his libido. What he employs for cultural aims he to a great extent withdraws from women and sexual life. His constant association with men, and his dependence on his relations with them, even 
estrange him from his duties as a husband and father. Thus the woman finds herself forced into the 
background by the claims of civilization and she adopts a hostile attitude towards it.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4498  
 
   The tendency on the part of civilization to restrict sexual life is no less clear than its other tendency to 
expand the cultural unit. Its first, totemic, phase already brings with it the prohibition against an incestuous 
choice of object, and this is perhaps the most drastic mutilation which man’s erotic life has in all time experienced. Taboos, laws and customs impose further restrictions, which affect both men and women. Not all civilizations go equally far in this; and the economic st ructure of the society also influences the amount of 
sexual freedom that remains. Here, as we already know, civilization is obeying the laws of economic necessity, since a large amount of the psychical ener gy which it uses for its own purposes has to be 
withdrawn from sexuality. In this respect civilizati on behaves towards sexuality as a people or a stratum of 
its population does which has subjected another one to its exploitation. Fear of a revolt by the suppressed elements drives it to stricter precautionary measures. A high-water mark in such a development has been reached in our Western European civilization. A cultural community is perfectly justified, psychologically, in 
starting by proscribing manifestations of the sexual life of children, for there would be no prospect of 
curbing the sexual lusts of adults if the ground had not been prepared for it in childhood. But such a community cannot in any way be justified in going to the length of actually disavowing  such easily 
demonstrable, and, indeed, striking phenomena. As regards the sexually mature individual, the choice of an 
object is restricted to the opposite sex, and most extra-genital satisfactions are forbidden as perversions. 
The requirement, demonstrated in these prohibitions, that there shall be a single kind of sexual life for everyone, disregards the dissimilarities, whether innate or acquired, in the sexual constitution of human 
beings; it cuts off a fair number of them from sexual enjoyment, and so becomes the source of serious 
injustice. The result of such restrictive measures might be that in people who are normal - who are not prevented by their constitution - the whole of their sexual interests would flow without loss into the channels 
that are left open. But heterosexual genital love, which has remained exempt from outlawry, is itself 
restricted by further limitations, in the shape of  insistence upon legitimacy and monogamy. Present-day 
civilization makes it plain that it will only permit sexual relationships on the basis of a solitary, indissoluble bond between one man and one woman, and that it does not like sexuality as a source of pleasure in its 
own right and is only prepared to tolerate it because there is so far no substitute for it as a means of 
propagating the human race.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4499  
 
   This, of course, is an extreme picture. Everybody knows that it has proved impossible to put it into 
execution, even for quite short periods. Only t he weaklings have submitted to such an extensive 
encroachment upon their sexual freedom, and stronger natures have only done so subject to a 
compensatory condition, which will be mentioned later. Civilized society has found itself obliged to pass over in silence many transgressions which, according to its own prescripts, it ought to have punished. But 
we must not err on the other side and assume that, because it does not achieve all its aims, such an 
attitude on the part of society is entirely innocuous. The sexual life of civilized man is notwithstanding 
severely impaired; it sometimes gives the impression of being in process of involution as a function, just as 
our teeth and hair seem to be as organs. One is probably justified in assuming that its importance as a 
source of feelings of happiness, and therefore in the fulfilment of our aim in life, has sensibly diminished.¹ Sometimes one seems to perceive that it is not only the pressure of civilization but something in the nature 
of the function itself which denies us full satisfacti on and urges us along other paths. This may be wrong; it 
is hard to decide.² 
 
   ¹ Among the works of that sensitive English writer, John Galsworthy, who enjoys general recognition to-day, there is a 
short story of which I early formed a high opinion. It is called ‘The Apple-Tree’, and it brings home to us how the life of present-day civilized people leaves no room for the simple natural love of two human beings. 
   
² The view expressed above is supported by the following considerations. Man is an animal organism with (like 
others) an unmistakably bisexual disposition. The individual corresponds to a fusion of two symmetrical halves, of 
which, according to some investigators, one is purely male and the other female. It is equally possible that each half was originally hermaphrodite. Sex is a biological fact which, although it is of extraordinary importance in mental life, is hard to grasp psychologically. We are accustomed to say that every human being displays both male and female instinctual impulses, needs and attributes; but though anatomy, it is true, can point out the characteristic of maleness and femaleness, psychology cannot. For psychology the contrast between the sexes fades away into one between activity and passivity, in which we far too readily identify activity with maleness and passivity with femaleness, a view which is by no means universally confirmed in the animal kingdom. The theory of bisexuality is still surrounded by many obscurities and we cannot but feel it as a serious impediment in psycho-analysis that it has not yet found any link with the theory of the instincts. However this may be, if we assume it as a fact that each individual seeks to satisfy both male and female wishes in his sexual life, we are prepared for the possibility that those demands are not fulfilled by the same object, and that they interfere with each other unless they can be kept apart and each impulse guided into a particular channel that is suited to it. Another difficulty arises from the circumstance that there is so often associated with the erotic relationship, over and above its own sadistic components, a quota of plain inclination to aggression. The love-object will not always view these complications with the degree of understanding and tolerance shown by the peasant woman who complained that her husband did not love her any more, since he had not beaten her for a week.    The conjecture which goes deepest, however, is the one which takes its start from what I have said above ( p. 4495
) 
in my footnote. It is to the effect that, with the assumption of an erect posture by man and with the depreciation of his sense of smell, it was not only his anal erotism which threatened to fall a victim to organic repression, but the whole of 
his sexuality; so that since this, the sexual function has been accompanied by a repugnance which cannot further be 
accounted for, and which prevents its complete satisfaction and forces it away from the sexual aim into sublimations and libidinal displacements. I know that Bleuler (1913) once pointed to the existence of a primary repelling attitude like this towards sexual life. All neurotics, and many others besides, take exception to the fact that ‘ inter urinas et faeces 
nascimur ’. The genitals, too, give rise to strong sensations of smell which many people cannot tolerate and which spoil 
sexual intercourse for them. Thus we should find that the deepest root of the sexual repression which advances along with civilization is the organic defence of the new form of life achieved with man’s erect gait against his earlier animal existence. This result of scientific research coincides in a remarkable way with commonplace prejudices that have often made themselves heard. Nevertheless, these things are at present no more than unconfirmed possibilities which have not been substantiated by science. Nor should we forget that, in spite of the undeniable depreciation of olfactory stimuli, there exist even in Europe people among whom the strong genital odours which are so repellent to us are highly prized as sexual stimulants and who refuse to give them up. (Cf. the collections of folklore obtained from Iwan Bloch’s questionnaire on the sense of smell in sexual life published in different volumes of Friedrich S. Krauss’s Anthropophyteia.)  
Civilization And Its Discontents4500  
 
V 
 
Psycho-analytic work has shown us that it is precisel y these frustrations of sexual life which people known 
as neurotics cannot tolerate. The neurotic creates substitutive satisfactions for himself in his symptoms, and these either cause him suffering in themselves or become sources of suffering for him by raising difficulties 
in his relations with his environment and the society he belongs to. The latter fact is easy to understand; the 
former presents us with a new problem. But civilization demands other sacrifices besides that of sexual satisfaction. 
   We have treated the difficulty of cultural development as a general difficulty of development by tracing it 
to the inertia of the libido, to its disinclination to give up an old position for a new one. We are saying much the same thing when we derive the antithesis between civilization and sexuality from the circumstance that 
sexual love is a relationship between two individuals in which a third can only be superfluous or disturbing, 
whereas civilization depends on relationships between a considerable number of individuals. When a love-relationship is at its height there is no room left for any interest in the environment; a pair of lovers are sufficient to themselves, and do not even need the child they have in common to make them happy. In no 
other case does Eros so clearly betray the core of his being, his purpose of making one out of more than 
one; but when he has achieved this in the proverbial way through the love of two human beings, he refuses to go further. 
   So far, we can quite well imagine a cultural community consisting of double individuals like this, who, 
libidinally satisfied in themselves, are connect ed with one another through the bonds of common work and 
common interests. If this were so, civilization would not have to withdraw any energy from sexuality. But 
this desirable state of things does not, and never did, exist. Reality shows us that civilization is not content 
with the ties we have so far allowed it. It aims at binding the members of the community together in a libidinal way as well and employs every means to that end. It favours every path by which strong identifications can be established between the me mbers of the community, and it summons up aim-
inhibited libido on the largest scale so as to strengthen the communal bond by relations of friendship. In order for these aims to be fulfilled, a restriction upon sexual life is unavoidable. But we are unable to understand what the necessity is which forces civiliz ation along this path and which causes its antagonism 
to sexuality. There must be some disturbing factor which we have not yet discovered.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4501  
 
   The clue may be supplied by one of the ideal demands, as we have called them, of civilized society. It 
runs: ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.’ It is known throughout the world and is undoubtedly older 
than Christianity, which puts it forward as its proudest claim. Yet it is certainly not very old; even in historical times it was still strange to mankind. Let us adopt a naïve attitude towards it, as though we were hearing it for the first time; we shall be unable then to suppress a feeling of surprise and bewilderment. Why should 
we do it? What good will it do us? But, above all, how shall we achieve it? How can it be possible? My love 
is something valuable to me which I ought not to throw away without reflection. It imposes duties on me for whose fulfilment I must be ready to make sacrifices. If I love someone, he must deserve it in some way. (I 
leave out of account the use he may be to me, and also his possible significance for me as a sexual object, 
for neither of these two kinds of relationship comes into question where the precept to love my neighbour is concerned.) He deserves it if he is so like me in important ways that I can love myself in him; and he 
deserves it if he is so much more perfect than myself that I can love my ideal of my own self in him. Again, I 
have to love him if he is my friend’s son, since the pain my friend would feel if any harm came to him would be my pain too - I should have to share it. But if he is a stranger to me and if he cannot attract me by any worth of his own or any significance that he may alr eady have acquired for my emotional life, it will be hard 
for me to love him. Indeed, I should be wrong to do so, for my love is valued by all my own people as a sign of my preferring them, and it is an injustice to them if I put a stranger on a par with them. But if I am to love him (with this universal love) merely because he, too, is an inhabitant of this earth, like an insect, an earth-
worm or a grass-snake, then I fear that only a small modicum of my love will fall to his share - not by any 
possibility as much as, by the judgement of my reason, I am entitled to retain for myself. What is the point of a precept enunciated with so much solemnity if its fulfilment cannot be recommended as reasonable? 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4502  
 
   On closer inspection, I find still further difficulties. Not merely is this stranger in general unworthy of my 
love; I must honestly confess that he has more claim to my hostility and even my hatred. He seems not to 
have the least trace of love for me and shows me not the slightest consideration. If it will do him any good he has no hesitation in injuring me, nor does he a sk himself whether the amount of advantage he gains 
bears any proportion to the extent of the harm he does to me. Indeed, he need not even obtain an 
advantage; if he can satisfy any sort of desire by it, he thinks nothing of jeering at me, insulting me, 
slandering me and showing his superior power; and the more secure he feels and the more helpless I am, the more certainly I can expect him to behave like this to me. If he behaves differently, if he shows me 
consideration and forbearance as a stranger, I am ready to treat him in the same way, in any case and 
quite apart from any precept. Indeed, if this grandiose commandment had run ‘Love thy neighbour as thy neighbour loves thee’, I should not take exception to it. And there is a second commandment, which seems 
to me even more incomprehensible and arouses still stronger opposition in me. It is ‘Love thine enemies’. If 
I think it over, however, I see that I am wrong in treating it as a greater imposition. At bottom it is the same thing.¹  
   ¹ A great imaginative writer may permit himself to give expression - jokingly, at all events - to psychological truths that 
are severely proscribed. Thus Heine confesses: ‘Mine is a most peaceable disposition. My wishes are: a humble cottage with a thatched roof, but a good bed, good food, the freshest milk and butter, flowers before my window, and a few fine trees before my door; and if God wants to make my happiness complete, he will grant me the joy of seeing some six or seven of my enemies hanging from those trees. Before their death I shall, moved in my heart, forgive them all the wrong they did me in their lifetime. One must, it is true, forgive one’s enemies - but not before they have been hanged.’ (Gedanken und Einfälle.)  
Civilization And Its Discontents4503  
 
   I think I can now hear a dignified voice admonishing me: ‘It is precisely because your neighbour is not 
worthy of love, and is on the contrary your enemy, t hat you should love him as yourself.’ I then understand 
that the case is one like that of Credo quia absurdum . 
   Now it is very probable that my neighbour, when he is enjoined to love me as himself, will answer exactly 
as I have done and will repel me for the same reasons. I hope he will not have the same objective grounds 
for doing so, but he will have the same idea as I have. Even so, the behaviour of human beings shows 
differences, which ethics, disregarding the fact that such differences are determined, classifies as ‘good’ or ‘bad’. So long as these undeniable differences have not been removed, obedience to high ethical demands 
entails damage to the aims of civilization, for it puts a positive premium on being bad. One is irresistibly 
reminded of an incident in the French Chamber when capital punishment was being debated. A member had been passionately supporting its abolition and his speech was being received with tumultuous 
applause, when a voice from the hall called out: ‘Que messieurs les assassins commencent!’ 
   The element of truth behind all this, which people are so ready to disavow, is that men are not gentle creatures who want to be loved, and who at the most c an defend themselves if they are attacked; they are, 
on the contrary, creatures among whose instinctual  endowments is to be reckoned a powerful share of 
aggressiveness. As a result, their neighbour is for them not only a potential helper or sexual object, but also someone who tempts them to satisfy their aggressiveness on him, to exploit his capacity for work without compensation, to use him sexually without his consent, to seize his possessions, to humiliate him, to cause 
him pain, to torture and to kill him. Homo homini lupus . Who, in the face of all his experience of life and of 
history, will have the courage to dispute this assertion? As a rule this cruel aggressiveness waits for some 
provocation or puts itself at the service of some other purpose, whose goal might also have been reached 
by milder measures. In circumstances that are fa vourable to it, when the mental counter-forces which 
ordinarily inhibit it are out of action, it also manifests itself spontaneously and reveals man as a savage 
beast to whom consideration towards his own kind is something alien. Anyone who calls to mind the atrocities committed during the racial migrations or the invasions of the Huns, or by the people known as 
Mongols under Jenghiz Khan and Tamerlane, or at the capture of Jerusalem by the pious Crusaders, or 
even, indeed, the horrors of the recent World War - anyone who calls these things to mind will have to bow 
humbly before the truth of this view. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4504  
 
   The existence of this inclination to aggression, which we can detect in ourselves and justly assume to be 
present in others, is the factor which disturbs our relations with our neighbour and which forces civilization 
into such a high expenditure. In consequence of this primary mutual hostility of human beings, civilized 
society is perpetually threatened with disintegration. The interest of work in common would not hold it together; instinctual passions are stronger than reasonable interests. Civilization has to use its utmost 
efforts in order to set limits to man’s aggressive instincts and to hold the manifestations of them in check by 
psychical reaction-formations. Hence, therefore, the use of methods intended to incite people into identifications and aim-inhibited relationships of love, hence the restriction upon sexual life, and hence too 
the ideal’s commandment to love one’s neighbour as oneself - a commandment which is really justified by 
the fact that nothing else runs so strongly counter to the original nature of man. In spite of every effort, these endeavours of civilization have not so far achieved very much. It hopes to prevent the crudest 
excesses of brutal violence by itself assuming the right to use violence against criminals, but the law is not 
able to lay hold of the more cautious and refined manifestations of human aggressiveness The time comes when each one of us has to give up as illusions the expectations which, in his youth, he pinned upon his 
fellow men, and when he may learn how much difficulty and pain has been added to his life by their ill-will. 
At the same time, it would be unfair to reproach civilization with trying to eliminate strife and competition 
from human activity. These things are undoubtedly indispensable. But opposition is not necessarily enmity; it is merely misused and made an occasion for enmity. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4505  
 
   The communists believe that they have found the path to deliverance from our evils. According to them, 
man is wholly good and is well-disposed to his neighbour ; but the institution of private property has 
corrupted his nature. The ownership of private wealth gives the individual power, and with it the temptation 
to ill-treat his neighbour; while the man who is excluded from possession is bound to rebel in hostility against his oppressor. If private property were abolished, all wealth held in common, and everyone allowed 
to share in the enjoyment of it, ill-will and hostility would disappear among men. Since everyone’s needs 
would be satisfied, no one would have any reason to regard another as his enemy; all would willingly undertake the work that was necessary. I have no concern with any economic criticisms of the communist 
system; I cannot enquire into whether the abolition of private property is expedient or advantageous.¹ But I 
am able to recognize that the psychological premisses on which the system is based are an untenable 
illusion. In abolishing private property we deprive the human love of aggression of one of its instruments, 
certainly a strong one, though certainly not the strongest; but we have in no way altered the differences in 
power and influence which are misused by aggressiveness, nor have we altered anything in its nature. Aggressiveness was not created by property. It reigned almost without limit in primitive times, when property was still very scanty, and it already shows itself in the nursery almost before property has given up 
its primal, anal form; it forms the basis of every relation of affection and love among people (with the single 
exception, perhaps, of the mother’s relation to her male child). If we do away with personal rights over material wealth, there still remains prerogative in the field of sexual relationships, which is bound to become 
the source of the strongest dislike and the most viol ent hostility among men who in other respects are on an 
equal footing. If we were to remove this factor, too, by allowing complete freedom of sexual life and thus 
abolishing the family, the germ-cell of civilization, we cannot, it is true, easily foresee what new paths the 
development of civilization could take; but one thing we can expect, and that is that this indestructible feature of human nature will follow it there.  
   ¹ Anyone who has tasted the miseries of poverty in his own youth and has experienced the indifference and 
arrogance of the well-to-do, should be safe from the suspicion of having no understanding or good will towards endeavours to fight against the inequality of wealth among men and all that it leads to. To be sure, if an attempt is made to base this fight upon an abstract demand, in the name of justice, for equality for all men, there is a very obvious objection to be made - that nature, by endowing individuals with extremely unequal physical attributes and mental capacities, has introduced injustices against which there is no remedy.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4506  
 
   It is clearly not easy for men to give up the satisfaction of this inclination to aggression. They do not feel 
comfortable without it. The advantage which a comparatively small cultural group offers of allowing this 
instinct an outlet in the form of hostility against intruders is not to be despised. It is always possible to bind together a considerable number of people in love, so long as there are other people left over to receive the manifestations of their aggressiveness. I once discu ssed the phenomenon that it is precisely communities 
with adjoining territories, and related to each other in other ways as well, who are engaged in constant feuds and in ridiculing each other - like the Spaniards  and Portuguese, for instance, the North Germans and 
South Germans, the English and Scotch, and so on. I gave this phenomenon the name of ‘the narcissism of 
minor differences’, a name which does not do much to ex plain it. We can now see that it is a convenient 
and relatively harmless satisfaction of the inclinati on to aggression, by means of which cohesion between 
the members of the community is made easier. In this respect the Jewish people, scattered everywhere, have rendered most useful services to the civilizations of the countries that have been their hosts; but 
unfortunately all the massacres of the Jews in the Middle Ages did not suffice to make that period more peaceful and secure for their Christian fellows. When once the Apostle Paul had posited universal love between men as the foundation of his Christian communi ty, extreme intolerance on the part of Christendom 
towards those who remained outside it became the inevitable consequence. To the Romans, who had not founded their communal life as a State upon love, religious intolerance was something foreign, although with them religion was a concern of the State and the State was permeated by religion. Neither was it an 
unaccountable chance that the dream of a Germanic world-dominion called for anti-Semitism as its 
complement; and it is intelligible that the attempt to establish a new, communist civilization in Russia should find its psychological support in the persecution of the bourgeois. One only wonders, with concern, what the 
Soviets will do after they have wiped out their bourgeois. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4507  
 
   If civilization imposes such great sacrifices not only on man’s sexuality but on his aggressivity, we can 
understand better why it is hard for him to be happy in that civilization. In fact, primitive man was better off 
in knowing no restrictions of instinct. To counterbalance this, his prospects of enjoying this happiness for any length of time were very slender. Civilized man has exchanged a portion of his possibilities of happiness for a portion of security. We must not forget, however, that in the primal family only the head of it 
enjoyed this instinctual freedom; the rest lived in slavish suppression. In that primal period of civilization, the 
contrast between a minority who enjoyed the advantages of civilization and a majority who were robbed of those advantages was, therefore, carried to extremes. As regards the primitive peoples who exist to-day, 
careful researches have shown that their instinctual life is by no means to be envied for its freedom. It is 
subject to restrictions of a different kind but perhaps of greater severity than those attaching to modern civilized man. 
   When we justly find fault with the present state of our civilization for so inadequately fulfilling our demands 
for a plan of life that shall make us happy, and for allowing the existence of so much suffering which could probably be avoided - when, with unsparing criticism, we try to uncover the roots of its imperfection, we are undoubtedly exercising a proper right and are not showing ourselves enemies of civilization. We may 
expect gradually to carry though such alterations in our civilization as will better satisfy our needs and will 
escape our criticisms. But perhaps we may also familiarize ourselves with the idea that there are difficulties attaching to the nature of civilization which will not yield to any attempt at reform. Over and above the tasks 
of restricting the instincts, which we are prepared for, there forces itself on our notice the danger of a state 
of things which might be termed ‘the psychological pov erty of groups’. This danger is most threatening 
where the bonds of a society are chiefly constituted by the identification of its members with one another, 
while individuals of the leader type do not acquire the impor tance that should fall to them in the formation of 
a group.¹ The present cultural state of America w ould give us a good opportunity for studying the damage 
to civilization which is thus to be feared. But I s hall avoid the temptation of entering upon a critique of 
American civilization; I do not wish to give an impression of wanting myself to employ American methods.  
   ¹ See Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego  (1921 c). 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4508  
 
VI 
 
In none of my previous writings have I had so strong a feeling as now that what I am describing is common knowledge and that I am using up paper and ink and, in due course, the compositor’s and printer’s work and material in order to expound things which are, in fact, self-evident. For that reason I should be glad to 
seize the point if it were to appear that the recognition of a special, independent aggressive instinct means 
an alteration of the psycho-analytic theory of the instincts.    We shall see, however, that this is not so and that it is merely a matter of bringing into sharper focus a 
turn of thought arrived at long ago and of following out  its consequences. Of all the slowly developed parts 
of analytic theory, the theory of the instincts is the one that has felt its way the most painfully forward. And 
yet that theory was so indispensable to the whole structure that something had to be put in its place. In 
what was at first my utter perplexity, I took as my  starting-point a saying of the poet-philosopher, Schiller, 
that ‘hunger and love are what moves the world’. Hunger could be taken to represent the instincts which 
aim at preserving the individual; while love strives after objects, and its chief function, favoured in every way by nature, is the preservation of the species. Thus, to begin with, ego-instincts and object-instincts 
confronted each other. It was to denote the energy of the latter and only the latter instinct that I introduced 
the term ‘libido’. Thus the antithesis was between the ego-instincts and the ‘libidinal’ instincts of love (in its widest sense) which were directed to an object. One of t hese object-instincts, the sadistic instinct, stood out 
from the rest, it is true, in that its aim was so very far from being loving. Moreover it was obviously in some respects attached to the ego-instincts: it could not hide its close affinity with instincts of mastery which have no libidinal purpose. But these discrepancies were got over; after all, sadism was clearly a part of sexual 
life, in the activities of which affection could be r eplaced by cruelty. Neurosis was regarded as the outcome 
of a struggle between the interest of self-preservation and the demands of the libido, a struggle in which the 
ego had been victorious but at the price of severe sufferings and renunciations.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4509  
 
   Every analyst will admit that even to-day this view has not the sound of a long-discarded error. 
Nevertheless, alterations in it became essential, as our enquiries advanced from the repressed to the 
repressing forces, from the object-instincts to the ego.  The decisive step forward was the introduction of the 
concept of narcissism - that is to say, the discovery t hat the ego itself is cathected with libido, that the ego, 
indeed, is the libido’s original home, and remains to some extent its headquarters. This narcissistic libido 
turns towards objects, and thus becomes object-libido; and it can change back into narcissistic libido once 
more. The concept of narcissism made it possible to obtain an analytic understanding of the traumatic neuroses and of many of the affections bordering on the psychoses, as well as of the latter themselves. It 
was not necessary to give up our interpretation of the transference neuroses as attempts made by the ego 
to defend itself against sexuality; but the concept of libido was endangered. Since the ego-instincts, too, 
were libidinal, it seemed for a time inevitable that we should make libido coincide with instinctual energy in 
general, as C. G. Jung had already advocated earlier. Nevertheless, there still remained in me a kind of 
conviction, for which I was not as yet able to find reasons, that the instincts could not all be of the same kind. My next step was taken in Beyond the Pleasure Principle  (1920 g), when the compulsion to repeat and 
the conservative character of instinctual life first attr acted my attention. Starting from speculations on the 
beginning of life and from biological parallels, I drew the conclusion that, besides the instinct to preserve living substance and to join it into ever larger units,¹ there must exist another, contrary instinct seeking to dissolve those units and to bring them back to their primaeval, inorganic state. That is to say, as well as 
Eros there was an instinct of death. The phenomena of life could be explained from the concurrent or 
mutually opposing action of these two instincts. It was not easy, however, to demonstrate the activities of this supposed death instinct. The manifestations of Eros were conspicuous and noisy enough. It might be 
assumed that the death instinct operated silently within the organism towards its dissolution, but that, of 
course, was no proof. A more fruitful idea was that a portion of the instinct is diverted towards the external world and comes to light as an instinct of aggressiveness and destructiveness. In this way the instinct itself could be pressed into the service of Eros, in that the organism was destroying some other thing, whether 
animate or inanimate, instead of destroying its own self. Conversely, any restriction of this aggressiveness 
directed outwards would be bound to increase the self-destr uction, which is in any case proceeding. At the 
same time one can suspect from this example that the two kinds of instinct seldom - perhaps never - 
appear in isolation from each other, but are alloyed with each other in varying and very different proportions 
and so become unrecognizable to our judgement. In sadism, long since known to us as a component instinct of sexuality, we should have before us a particularly strong alloy of this kind between trends of love 
and the destructive instinct; while its counterpart, masochism, would be a union between destructiveness 
directed inwards and sexuality - a union which makes what is otherwise an imperceptible trend into a conspicuous and tangible one. 
 
   ¹ The opposition which thus emerges between the ceaseless trend by Eros towards extension and the general 
conservative nature of the instincts is striking, and it may become the starting-point for the study of further problems. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4510  
 
   The assumption of the existence of an instinct of death or destruction has met with resistance even in 
analytic circles; I am aware that there is a frequent inclination rather to ascribe whatever is dangerous and 
hostile in love to an original bipolarity in its own nature. To begin with it was only tentatively that I put 
forward the views I have developed here, but in the course of time they have gained such a hold upon me that I can no longer think in any other way. To my mind, they are far more serviceable from a theoretical 
standpoint than any other possible ones; they provide that simplification, without either ignoring or doing 
violence to the facts, for which we strive in scientific work. I know that in sadism and masochism we have always seen before us manifestations of the destructive instinct (directed outwards and inwards), strongly 
alloyed with erotism; but I can no longer understand how  we can have overlooked the ubiquity of non-erotic 
aggressivity and destructiveness and can have failed to give it its due place in our interpretation of life. (The 
desire for destruction when it is directed inwards  mostly eludes our perception, of course, unless it is tinged 
with erotism.) I remember my own defensive attit ude when the idea of an instinct of destruction first 
emerged in psycho-analytic literature, and how long it took before I became receptive to it. That others 
should have shown, and still show, the same attitude of rejection surprises me less. For ‘little children do not like it’ when there is talk of the inborn human inclination to ‘badness’, to aggressiveness and 
destructiveness, and so to cruelty as well. God has made them in the image of His own perfection; nobody 
wants to be reminded how hard it is to reconcile the undeniable existence of evil - despite the protestations of Christian Science - with His all-powerfulness or His all-goodness. The Devil would be the best way out as 
an excuse for God; in that way he would be playing the same part as an agent of economic discharge as 
the Jew does in the world of the Aryan ideal. But even so, one can hold God responsible for the existence of the Devil just as well as for the existence of t he wickedness which the Devil embodies. In view of these 
difficulties, each of us will be well advised, on some suitable occasion, to make a low bow to the deeply moral nature of mankind; it will help us to be generally popular and much will be forgiven us for it.¹  
   ¹ In Goethe’s Mephistopheles we have a quite exceptionally c onvincing identification of the principle of evil with the 
destructive instinct:      Denn alles, was entsteht,    Ist wert, dass es zu Grunde geht . . .    So ist dann alles, was Ihr Sünde,    Zerstörung, kurz das Böse nennt,    Mein eigentliches Element.     The Devil himself names as his adversary, not what is holy and good, but Nature’s power to create, to multiply life - that is, Eros:  
   Der Luft, dem Wasser, wie der Erden 
   Entwinden tausend Keime sich,    Im Trocknen, Feuchten, Warmen, Kalten!    Hätt’ ich mir nicht die Flamme vorbehalten,    Ich hätte nichts Aparts für mich.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4511  
 
   The name ‘libido’ can once more be used to denote the manifestations of the power of Eros in order to 
distinguish them from the energy of the death instinc t.¹ It must be confessed that we have much greater 
difficulty in grasping that instinct; we can only suspect it, as it were, as something in the background behind 
Eros, and it escapes detection unless its presence is betrayed by its being alloyed with Eros. It is in sadism, where the death instinct twists the erotic aim in its own sense and yet at the same time fully satisfies the 
erotic urge, that we succeed in obtaining the clearest insight into its nature and its relation to Eros. But even 
where it emerges without any sexual purpose, in the blindest fury of destructiveness, we cannot fail to 
recognize that the satisfaction of the instinct is accompanied by an extraordinarily high degree of 
narcissistic enjoyment, owing to its presenting the ego with a fulfilment of the latter’s old wishes for 
omnipotence. The instinct of destruction, moderated and tamed, and, as it were, inhibited in its aim, must, when it is directed towards objects, provide the ego with the satisfaction of its vital needs and with control 
over nature. Since the assumption of the existence of  the instinct is mainly based on theoretical grounds, 
we must also admit that it is not entirely proof against theoretical objections. But this is how things appear 
to us now, in the present state of our knowledge; future research and reflection will no doubt bring further light which will decide the matter. 
 
   ¹ Our present point of view can be roughly expressed in the statement that libido has a share in every instinctual 
manifestation, but that not everything in that manifestation is libido. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4512  
 
   In all that follows I adopt the standpoint, therefore, that the inclination to aggression is an original, self-
subsisting instinctual disposition in man, and I return to my view that it constitutes the greatest impediment 
to civilization. At one point in the course of this enqui ry I was led to the idea that civilization was a special 
process which mankind undergoes, and I am still under the influence of that idea. I may now add that civilization is a process in the service of Eros, whose purpose is to combine single human individuals, and 
after that families, then races, peoples and nations, into one great unity, the unity of mankind. Why this has 
to happen, we do not know; the work of Eros is precisely this. 1 These collections of men are to be libidinally bound to one another. Necessity alone, the advantages of work in common, will not hold them 
together. But man’s natural aggressive instinct, the hostility of each against all and of all against each, 
opposes this programme of civilization. This aggressive instinct is the derivative and the main representative of the death instinct which we hav e found alongside of Eros and which shares world-
dominion with it. And now, I think, the meaning of the evolution of civilization is no longer obscure to us. It must present the struggle between Eros and Death, between the instinct of life and the instinct of 
destruction, as it works itself out in the human species. This struggle is what all life essentially consists of, and the evolution of civilization may therefore be si mply described as the struggle for life of the human 
species.¹ And it is this battle of the giants that our nurse-maids try to appease with their lullaby about Heaven.  
   ¹ And we may probably add more precisely, a struggle for life in the shape it was bound to assume after a certain 
event which still remains to be discovered.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4513  
 
VII 
 
Why do our relatives, the animals, not exhibit any such cultural struggle? We do not know. Very probably some of them - the bees, the ants, the termites - strove for thousands of years before they arrived at the State institutions, the distribution of functions and the restrictions on the individual, for which we admire 
them to-day. It is a mark of our present condition that  we know from our own feelings that we should not 
think ourselves happy in any of these animal States or in any of the roles assigned in them to the individual. 
In the case of other animal species it may be that a temporary balance has been reached between the 
influences of their environment and the mutually contendi ng instincts within them, and that thus a cessation 
of development has come about. It may be that in primitive man a fresh access of libido kindled a renewed 
burst of activity on the part of the destructive instinct. There are a great many questions here to which as 
yet there is no answer. 
   Another question concerns us more nearly. What means does civilization employ in order to inhibit the aggressiveness which opposes it, to make it harmless, to get rid of it, perhaps? We have already become acquainted with a few of these methods, but not yet with the one that appears to be the most important. 
This we can study in the history of the development of the individual. What happens in him to render his 
desire for aggression innocuous? Something very remarkable, which we should never have guessed and which is nevertheless quite obvious. His aggressiveness is introjected, internalized; it is, in point of fact, 
sent back to where it came from - that is, it is directed towards his own ego. There it is taken over by a 
portion of the ego, which sets itself over against t he rest of the ego as super-ego, and which now, in the 
form of ‘conscience’, is ready to put into action against the ego the same harsh aggressiveness that the ego 
would have liked to satisfy upon other, extraneous individuals. The tension between the harsh super-ego 
and the ego that is subjected to it, is called by us the sense of guilt; it expresses itself as a need for punishment. Civilization, therefore, obtains mastery over the individual’s dangerous desire for aggression by weakening and disarming it and by setting up an agency within him to watch over it, like a garrison in a 
conquered city. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4514  
 
   As to the origin of the sense of guilt, the analyst has different views from other psychologists; but even he 
does not find it easy to give an account of it. To begin with, if we ask how a person comes to have a sense 
of guilt, we arrive at an answer which cannot be disputed: a person feels guilty (devout people would say ‘sinful’) when he has done something which he knows to be ‘bad’. But then we notice how little this answer tells us. Perhaps, after some hesitation, we s hall add that even when a person has not actually done the 
bad thing but has only recognized in himself an intention to do it, he may regard himself as guilty; and the question then arises of why the intention is regarded as equal to the deed. Both cases, however, presuppose that one had already recognized that what is  bad is reprehensible, is something that must not 
be carried out. How is this judgement arrived at? We may reject the existence of an original, as it were natural, capacity to distinguish good from bad. What is bad is often not at all what is injurious or dangerous 
to the ego; on the contrary, it may be something which is desirable and enjoyable to the ego. Here, 
therefore, there is an extraneous influence at work, and it  is this that decides what is to be called good or 
bad. Since a person’s own feelings would not have led him along this path, he must have had a motive for 
submitting to this extraneous influence. Such a motive is easily discovered in his helplessness and his dependence on other people, and it can best be designated as fear of loss of love. If he loses the love of 
another person upon whom he is dependent, he also ceases to be protected from a variety of dangers. 
Above all, he is exposed to the danger that this stronger person will show his superiority in the form of punishment. At the beginning, therefore, what is bad is  whatever causes one to be threatened with loss of 
love. For fear of that loss, one must avoid it. This, too, is the reason why it makes little difference whether one has already done the bad thing or only intends to do it. In either case the danger only sets in if and when the authority discovers it, and in either case the authority would behave in the same way. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4515  
 
   This state of mind is called a ‘bad conscience’; but ac tually it does not deserve this name, for at this stage 
the sense of guilt is clearly only a fear of loss of love, ‘social’ anxiety. In small children it can never be 
anything else, but in many adults, too, it has only changed to the extent that the place of the father or the two parents is taken by the larger human community. Consequently, such people habitually allow themselves to do any bad thing which promises them enj oyment, so long as they are sure that the authority 
will not know anything about it or cannot blame them fo r it; they are afraid only of being found out.¹ Present-
day society has to reckon in general with this state of mind.    A great change takes place only when the authority is  internalized through the establishment of a super-
ego. The phenomena of conscience then reach a higher stage.  Actually, it is not until now that we should 
speak of conscience or a sense of guilt.² At this point, too, the fear of being found out comes to an end; the distinction, moreover, between doing something bad and wishing to do it disappears entirely, since nothing 
can be hidden from the super-ego, not even thoughts. It is true that the seriousness of the situation from a 
real point of view has passed away, for the new authorit y, the super-ego, has no motive that we know of for 
ill-treating the ego, with which it is intimately bound up; but genetic influence, which leads to the survival of 
what is past and has been surmounted, makes itself felt in the fact that fundamentally things remain as they were at the beginning. The super-ego torments the sinful  ego with the same feeling of anxiety and is on the 
watch for opportunities of getting it punished by the external world. 
 
   ¹ This reminds one of Rousseau’s famous mandarin. 
   ² Everyone of discernment will understand and take into account the fact that in this summary description we have 
sharply delimited events which in reality occur by gradual transitions, and that it is not merely a question of the existence  of a super-ego but of its relative strength and sphere of influence. All that has been said above about 
conscience and guilt is, moreover, common knowledge and almost undisputed.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4516  
 
   At this second stage of development, the conscience exhibits a peculiarity which was absent from the first 
stage and which is no longer easy to account for. For the more virtuous a man is, the more severe and 
distrustful is its behaviour, so that ultimately it is precisely those people who have carried saintliness furthest who reproach themselves with the worst sinfulne ss. This means that virtue forfeits some part of its 
promised reward; the docile and continent ego does not enjoy  the trust of its mentor, and strives in vain, it 
would seem, to acquire it. The objection will at once be made that these difficulties are artificial ones, and it will be said that a stricter and more vigilant conscience is precisely the hallmark of a moral man. Moreover, when saints call themselves sinners, they are not so wrong, considering the temptations to instinctual 
satisfaction to which they are exposed in a specially high degree - since, as is well known, temptations are 
merely increased by constant frustration, whereas an occasional satisfaction of them causes them to 
diminish, at least for the time being. The field of ethics, which is so full of problems, presents us with 
another fact: namely that ill-luck - that is, external frustration - so greatly enhances the power of the 
conscience in the super-ego. As long as things to well with a man, his conscience is lenient and lets the ego do all sorts of things; but when misfortune befalls him, he searches his soul, acknowledges his sinfulness, heightens the demands of his consci ence, imposes abstinences on himself and punishes 
himself with penances.¹ Whole peoples have behaved in this may, and still do. This, however, is easily explained by the original infantile stage of conscienc e, which, as we see, is not given up after the 
introjection into the super-ego, but persists alongside of it and behind it. Fate is regarded as a substitute for 
the parental agency. If a man is unfortunate it means t hat he is no longer loved by this highest power; and, 
threatened by such a loss of love, he once more bows to the parental representative in his super-ego - a 
representative whom, in his days of good fortune, he was ready to neglect. This becomes especially clear 
where Fate is looked upon in the strictly religious sense of being nothing else than an expression of the 
Divine Will. The people of Israel had believed themselves to be the favourite child of God, and when the great Father caused misfortune after misfortune to rain down upon this people of his, they were never shaken in their belief in his relationship to them or questioned his power or righteousness. Instead, they 
produced the prophets, who held up their sinfulness befor e them; and out of their sense of guilt they 
created the over-strict commandments of their priestly re ligion. It is remarkable how differently a primitive 
man behaves. If he has met with a misfortune, he does not throw the blame on himself but on his fetish, which has obviously not done its duty, and he gives it a thrashing instead of punishing himself. 
 
   ¹ This enhancing of morality as a consequence of ill-luck has been illustrated by Mark Twain in a delightful little story, 
The First Melon I ever Stole . This first melon happened to be unripe. I heard Mark Twain tell the story himself in one of 
his public readings. After he had given out the title, he stopped and asked himself as though he was in doubt: ‘ Was it 
the first?’ With this, everything had been said. The first melon was evidently not the only one.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4517  
 
   Thus we know of two origins of the sense of guilt: one arising from fear of an authority, and the other, 
later on, arising from fear of the super-ego. The first insists upon a renunciation of instinctual satisfactions; 
the second, as well as doing this, presses for punishment, since the continuance of the forbidden wishes cannot be concealed from the super-ego. We have also learned how the severity of the super-ego - the demands of conscience - is to be understood. It is simply  a continuation of the severity of the external 
authority, to which it has succeeded and which it has in part replaced. We now see in what relationship the 
renunciation of instinct stands to the sense of guilt. Originally, renunciation of instinct was the result of fear of an external authority: one renounced one’s satisfactions in order not to lose its love. If one has carried 
out this renunciation, one is, as it were, quits with  the authority and no sense of guilt should remain. But 
with fear of the super-ego the case is different. Here, instinctual renunciation is not enough, for the wish 
persists and cannot be concealed from the super-ego. Thus, in spite of the renunciation that has been 
made, a sense of guilt comes about. This constitute s a great economic disadvantage in the erection of a 
super-ego, or, as we may put it, in the formation of a conscience. Instinctual renunciation now no longer 
has a completely liberating effect; virtuous continence is no longer rewarded with the assurance of love. A threatened external unhappiness - loss of love and punishment on the part of the external authority - has 
been exchanged for a permanent internal unhappiness, for the tension of the sense of guilt. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4518  
 
   These interrelations are so complicated and at the same time so important that, at the risk of repeating 
myself, I shall approach them from yet another angle. The chronological sequence, then, would be as 
follows. First comes renunciation of instinct owing to fear of aggression by the external  authority. (This is, of 
course, what fear of the loss of love amounts to, for love is a protection against this punitive aggression.) After that comes the erection of an internal  authority, and renunciation of instinct owing to fear of it - owing 
to fear of conscience. In this second situation bad intentions are equated with bad actions, and hence come 
a sense of guilt and a need for punishment. The aggressiveness of conscience keeps up the aggressiveness of the authority. So far things have no doubt been made clear; but where does this leave 
room for the reinforcing influence of misfortune (of renunciation imposed from without), and for the 
extraordinary severity of conscience in the best and most tractable people? We have already explained both these peculiarities of conscience, but we pr obably still have an impression that those explanations do 
not go to the bottom of the matter, and leave a residue still unexplained. And here at last an idea comes in which belongs entirely to psycho-analysis and which is foreign to people’s ordinary way of thinking. This idea is of a sort which enables us to understand why the subject-matter was bound to seem so confused and obscure to us. For it tells us that conscience (or more correctly, the anxiety which later becomes 
conscience) is indeed the cause of instinctual renunciati on to begin with, but that later the relationship is 
reversed. Every renunciation of instinct now becomes a dynamic source of conscience and every fresh 
renunciation increases the latter’s severity and intolerance. If we could only bring it better into harmony with 
what we already know about the history of the orig in of conscience, we should be tempted to defend the 
paradoxical statement that conscience is the result of instinctual renunciation, or that instinctual 
renunciation (imposed on us from without) creates conscience, which then demands further instinctual 
renunciation. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4519  
 
   The contradiction between this statement and w hat we have previously said about the genesis of 
conscience is in point of fact not so very great, and we see a way of further reducing it. In order to make our 
exposition easier, let us take as our example the aggressive instinct, and let us assume that the renunciation in question is always a renunciation of aggression. (This, of course, is only to be taken as a temporary assumption.) The effect of instinctual renunciation on the conscience then is that every piece of 
aggression whose satisfaction the subject gives up is ta ken over by the super-ego and increases the latter’s 
aggressiveness (against the ego). This does not harmonize well with the view that the original 
aggressiveness of conscience is a continuance of the se verity of the external authority and therefore has 
nothing to do with renunciation. But the discrepancy is removed if we postulate a different derivation for this first instalment of the super-ego’s aggressivity. A considerable amount of aggressiveness must be developed in the child against the authority which prevents him from having his first, but none the less his 
most important, satisfactions, whatever the kind of instinctual deprivation that is demanded of him may be; 
but he is obliged to renounce the satisfaction of this revengeful aggressiveness. He finds his way out of this economically difficult situation with the help of familiar mechanisms. By means of identification he takes the unattackable authority into himself. The authority now turns into his super-ego and enters into possession 
of all the aggressiveness which a child would have liked to exercise against it. The child’s ego has to 
content itself with the unhappy role of the authority - the father - who has been thus degraded. Here, as so 
often, the situation is reversed: ‘If I were the father and you were the child, I should treat you badly.’ The 
relationship between the super-ego and the ego is a return, distorted by a wish, of the real relationships 
between the ego, as yet undivided, and an external object. T hat is typical, too. But the essential difference 
is that the original severity of the super-ego does not - or does not so much - represent the severity which one has experienced from it, or which one attributes to it; it represents rather one’s own aggressiveness 
towards it. If this is correct, we may assert truly that in the beginning conscience arises through the suppression of an aggressive impulse, and that it is subsequently reinforced by fresh suppressions of the same kind. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4520  
 
   Which of these two views is correct? The earlier one, which genetically seemed so unassailable, or the 
newer one, which rounds off the theory in such a welcome fashion? Clearly, and by the evidence, too, of 
direct observations, both are justified. They do not contradict each other, and they even coincide at one point, for the child’s revengeful aggressiveness will be in part determined by the amount of punitive aggression which he expects from his father. Experience shows, however, that the severity of the super-
ego which a child develops in no way corresponds to the severity of treatment which he has himself met with.¹ The severity of the former seems to be independent of that of the latter. A child who has been very leniently brought up can acquire a very strict conscience. But it would also be wrong to exaggerate this 
independence; it is not difficult to convince oneself that severity of upbringing does also exert a strong 
influence on the formation of the child’s super-ego. What it amounts to is that in the formation of the super-
ego and the emergence of a conscience innate constitutional factors and influences from the real 
environment act in combination. This is not at all surprising; on the contrary, it is a universal aetiological 
condition for all such processes.²  
   ¹ As has rightly been emphasized by Melanie Klein and by other English writers. 
   ² The two main types of pathogenic methods of upbringing - over-strictness and spoiling - have been accurately 
assessed by Franz Alexander in his book The Psychoanalysis of the Total Personality  (1927) in connection with 
Aichhorn’s study of delinquency. The ‘unduly lenient and indulgent father’ is the cause of children’s forming an over-severe super-ego, because, under the impression of the love that they receive, they have no other outlet for their aggressiveness but turning it inwards. In delinquent children, who have been brought up without love, the tension between ego and super-ego is lacking, and the whole of their aggressiveness can be directed outwards. Apart from a constitutional factor which may be supposed to be present, it can be said, therefore, that a severe conscience arises from the joint operation of two factors: the frustration of instinct, which unleashes aggressiveness, and the experience of being loved, which turns the aggressiveness inwards and hands it over to the super-ego.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4521  
 
   It can also be asserted that when a child reacts to his first great instinctual frustrations with excessively 
strong aggressiveness and with a correspondingly severe super-ego, he is following a phylogenetic model 
and is going beyond the response that would be currently ju stified; for the father of prehistoric times was 
undoubtedly terrible, and an extreme amount of aggressiveness may be attributed to him. Thus, if one shifts over from individual to phylogenetic development, the differences between the two theories of the 
genesis of conscience are still further diminished. On the other hand, a new and important difference 
makes its appearance between these two developmental processes. We cannot get away from the 
assumption that man’s sense of guilt springs from the Oedipus complex and was acquired at the killing of 
the father by the brothers banded together. On that occasion an act of aggression was not suppressed but 
carried out; but it was the same act of aggression whose suppression in the child is supposed to be the source of his sense of guilt. At this point I should not be surprised if the reader were to exclaim angrily: ‘So 
it makes no difference whether one kills one’s father or not - one gets a feeling of guilt in either case! We 
may take leave to raise a few doubts here. Either it is not true that the sense of guilt comes from suppressed aggressiveness, or else the whole story of t he killing of the father is a fiction and the children of 
primaeval man did not kill their fathers any more often than children do nowadays. Besides, if it is not fiction 
but a plausible piece of history, it would be a case of something happening which everyone expects to 
happen - namely, of a person feeling guilty becaus e he really has done something which cannot be 
justified. And of this event, which is after all an everyday occurrence, psycho-analysis has not yet given any 
explanation.’ 
   That is true, and we must make good the omission. Nor is there any great secret about the matter. When one has a sense of guilt after having committed a misdeed, and because of it, the feeling should more 
properly be called remorse. It relates only to a deed that has been done, and, of course, it presupposes that 
a conscience - the readiness to feel guilty - was already in existence before the deed took place. Remorse 
of this sort can, therefore, never help us to discove r the origin of conscience and of the sense of guilt in 
general. What happens in these everyday cases is usually this: an instinctual need acquires the strength to achieve satisfaction in spite of the conscience, which is , after all, limited in its strength; and with the natural 
weakening of the need owing to its having been satisfied, the former balance of power is restored. Psycho-
analysis is thus justified in excluding from the present discussion the case of a sense of guilt due to 
remorse, however frequently such cases occur and however great their practical importance. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4522  
 
   But if the human sense of guilt goes back to the killing of the primal father, that was after all a case of 
‘remorse’. Are we to assume that a conscience and a sense of guilt were not, as we have presupposed, in 
existence before the deed? If not, where, in this case, did the remorse come from? There is no doubt that this case should explain the secret of the sense of guilt to us and put an end to our difficulties. And I believe it does. This remorse was the result of the primordial ambivalence of feeling towards the father. His sons 
hated him, but they loved him, too. After their hatred had been satisfied by their act of aggression, their love 
came to the fore in their remorse for the deed. It set up the super-ego by identification with the father; it gave that agency the father’s power, as though as a punishment for the deed of aggression they had 
carried out against him, and it created the restrictions which were intended to prevent a repetition of the 
deed. And since the inclination to aggressiveness against the father was repeated in the following generations, the sense of guilt, too, persisted, and it was reinforced once more by every piece of 
aggressiveness that was suppressed and carried over to the super-ego. Now, I think, we can at last grasp two things perfectly clearly: the part played by love in the origin of conscience and the fatal inevitability of 
the sense of guilt. Whether one has killed one’s father or has abstained from doing so is not really the decisive thing. One is bound to feel guilty in either case, for the sense of guilt is an expression of the 
conflict due to ambivalence, of the eternal struggle between Eros and the instinct of destruction or death. This conflict is set going as soon as men are fac ed with the task of living together. So long as the 
community assumes no other form than that of the family, the conflict is bound to express itself in the 
Oedipus complex, to establish the conscience and to create the first sense of guilt. When an attempt is 
made to widen the community, the same conflict is continued in forms which are dependent on the past; and it is strengthened and results in a further intensification of the sense of guilt. Since civilization obeys an 
internal erotic impulsion which causes human beings to unite in a closely-knit group, it can only achieve this 
aim through an ever-increasing reinforcement of the sense of guilt. What began in relation to the father is completed in relation to the group. If civilization is a necessary course of development from the family to humanity as a whole, then - as a result of the inbor n conflict arising from ambivalence, of the eternal 
struggle between the trends of love and death - there is inextricably bound up with it an increase of the sense of guilt, which will perhaps reach heights that the individual finds hard to tolerate. One is reminded of the great poet’s moving arraignment of the ‘Heavenly Powers’:- 
 
   Ihr führt in’s Leben uns hinein. 
   Ihr lasst den Armen schuldig werden,    Dann überlasst Ihr ihn den Pein, 
   Denn iede Schuld rächt sich auf Erden.
¹ 
 
And we may well heave a sigh of relief at the thought that  it is nevertheless vouchsafed to a few to salvage 
without effort from the whirlpool of their own feeli ngs the deepest truths, towards which the rest of us have 
to find our way through tormenting uncertainty and with restless groping. 
 
   ¹ One of the Harp-player’s songs in Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister . 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4523  
 
VIII 
 
Having reached the end of his journey, the author must ask his readers’ forgiveness for not having been a more skilful guide and for not having spared them empty stretches of road and troublesome détours . There 
is no doubt that it could have been done better. I will attempt, late in the day, to make some amends. 
 
   In the first place, I suspect that the reader has the impression that our discussions on the sense of guilt 
disrupt the framework of this essay: that they take up t oo much space, so that the rest of its subject-matter, 
with which they are not always closely connected, is pushed to one side. This may have spoilt the structure 
of my paper; but it corresponds faithfully to my int ention to represent the sense of guilt as the most 
important problem in the development of civilization and to show that the price we pay for our advance in 
civilization is a loss of happiness through the heightening of the sense of guilt.¹ Anything that still sounds 
strange about this statement, which is the final conclu sion of our investigation, can probably be traced to 
the quite peculiar relationship - as yet completely unexplained - which the sense of guilt has to our consciousness. In the common case of remorse, which we regard as normal, this feeling makes itself 
clearly enough perceptible to consciousness. Indeed, we are accustomed to speak of a ‘consciousness of 
guilt’ instead of a ‘sense of guilt’. Our study of the neur oses, to which, after all we owe the most valuable 
pointers to an understanding of normal conditions, brings us up against some contradictions. In one of 
those affections, obsessional neurosis, the sense of guilt makes itself noisily heard in consciousness; it 
dominates the clinical picture and the patient’s life as well, and it hardly allows anything else to appear alongside of it. But in most other cases and forms of neurosis it remains completely unconscious, without 
on that account producing any less important effects. Our patients do not believe us when we attribute an 
‘unconscious sense of guilt’ to them. In order to make ourselves at all intelligible to them, we tell them of an unconscious need for punishment, in which the sense of guilt finds expression. But its connection with a particular form of neurosis must not be over-estimated. Even in obsessional neurosis there are types of 
patients who are not aware of their sense of guilt, or who only feel it as a tormenting uneasiness, a kind of 
anxiety, if they are prevented from carrying out certain actions. It ought to be possible eventually to understand these things; but as yet we cannot. Here per haps we may be glad to have it pointed out that the 
sense of guilt is at bottom nothing else but a topographica l variety of anxiety; in its later phases it coincides 
completely with fear of the super-ego . And the relations of anxiety to consciousness exhibit the same 
extraordinary variations. Anxiety is always present somewhere or other behind every symptom; but at one 
time it takes noisy possession of the whole of consciousness, while at another it conceals itself so 
completely that we are obliged to speak of unconscious anxiety or, if we want to have a clearer psychological conscience, since anxiety is in the first instance simply a feeling, of possibilities of anxiety. 
Consequently it is very conceivable that the sense of guilt produced by civilization is not perceived as such 
either, and remains to a large extent unconscious, or appears as a sort of malaise, a dissatisfaction, for 
which people seek other motivations. Religions, at any rate, have never overlooked the part played in civilization by a sense of guilt. Furthermore - a point which I failed to appreciate elsewhere² - they claim to 
redeem mankind from this sense of guilt, which they call sin. From the manner in which, in Christianity, this 
redemption is achieved - by the sacrificial death of a single person, who in this manner takes upon himself a guilt that is common to everyone - we have been able to infer what the first occasion may have been on 
which this primal guilt, which was also the beginning of civilization, was acquired.³ 
 
   ¹ ‘Thus conscience does make cowards of us all . . .’ 
   That the education of young people at the present day conceals from them the part which sexuality will play in their 
lives is not the only reproach which we are obliged to make against it. Its other sin is that it does not prepare them for 
the aggressiveness of which they are destined to become the objects. In sending the young out into life with such a false psychological orientation, education is behaving as though one were to equip people starting on a Polar expedition with summer clothing and maps of the Italian Lakes. In this it becomes evident that a certain misuse is being made of ethical demands. The strictness of those demands would not do so much harm if education were to say: ‘This is how men ought to be, in order to be happy and to make others happy; but you have to reckon on their not being like that.’ Instead of this the young are made to believe that everyone else fulfils those ethical demands - that is, that everyone else is virtuous. It is on this that the demand is based that the young, too, shall become virtuous. 
   
² In The Future of an Illusion  (1927 c) 
   ³ Totem and Taboo (1912-13). 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4524  
 
   Though it cannot be of great importance, it may not be superfluous to elucidate the meaning of a few 
words such as ‘super-ego’, ‘conscience’, ‘sense of guilt’, ‘need for punishment’ and ‘remorse’, which we 
have often, perhaps, used too loosely and interchangeably. They all relate to the same state of affairs, but denote different aspects of it. The super-ego is an agency which has been inferred by us, and conscience is 
a function which we ascribe, among other functions, to  that agency. This function consists in keeping a 
watch over the actions and intentions of the ego and judging them, in exercising a censorship. The sense of guilt, the harshness of the super-ego, is thus the same thing as the severity of the conscience. It is the perception which the ego has of being watched over in th is way, the assessment of the tension between its 
own strivings and the demands of the super-ego. The fear of this critical agency (a fear which is at the bottom of the whole relationship), the need for punishment, is an instinctual manifestation on the part of the ego, which has become masochistic under the influence of a sadistic super-ego; it is a portion, that is to 
say, of the instinct towards internal destruction present in the ego, employed for forming an erotic attachment to the super-ego. We ought not to speak of a conscience until a super-ego is demonstrably present. As to a sense of guilt, we must admit that it is in existence before the super-ego, and therefore 
before conscience, too. At that time it is the imm ediate expression of fear of the external authority, a 
recognition of the tension between the ego and that author ity. It is the direct derivative of the conflict 
between the need for the authority’s love and the urge towards instinctual satisfaction, whose inhibition produces the inclination to aggression. The superimpositi on of these two strata of the sense of guilt - one 
coming from fear of the external  authority, the other from fear of the internal  authority - has hampered our 
insight into the position of conscience in a number of ways. Remorse is a general term for the ego’s reaction in a case of sense of guilt. It contains, in little altered form, the sensory material of the anxiety 
which is operating behind the sense of guilt; it is itself a punishment and can include the need for 
punishment. Thus remorse, too, can be older than conscience.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4525  
 
   Nor will it do any harm if we once more review the contradictions which have for a while perplexed us 
during our enquiry. Thus, at one point the sense of guilt was the consequence of acts of aggression that 
had been abstained from; but at another point - and precisely at its historical beginning, the killing of the 
father - it was the consequence of an act of aggression that had been carried out. But a way out of this difficulty was found. For the institution of the internal authority, the super-ego, altered the situation radically. 
Before this, the sense of guilt coincided with remorse. (We may remark, incidentally, that the term ‘remorse’ should be reserved for the reaction after an act of aggression has actually been carried out.) After this, owing to the omniscience of the super-ego, the difference between an aggression intended and an 
aggression carried out lost its force. Henceforward a sense of guilt could be produced not only by an act of 
violence that is actually carried out (as all the world knows), but also by one that is merely intended (as 
psycho-analysis has discovered). Irrespectively of this alteration in the psychological situation, the conflict 
arising from ambivalence - the conflict between the two pr imal instincts - leaves the same result behind. We 
are tempted to look here for the solution of the problem of the varying relation in which the sense of guilt 
stands to consciousness. It might be thought that a sense of guilt arising from remorse for an evil deed 
must always be conscious, whereas a sense of guilt arising from the perception of an evil impulse  may 
remain unconscious. But the answer is not so simple as that. Obsessional neurosis speaks energetically against it.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4526  
 
   The second contradiction concerned the aggressive  energy with which we suppose the super-ego to be 
endowed. According to one view, that energy merely carries on the punitive energy of the external authority 
and keeps it alive in the mind; while, according to anot her view, it consists, on the contrary, of one’s own 
aggressive energy which has not been used and which one now directs against that inhibiting authority. The first view seemed to fit in better with the history , and the second with the theory , of the sense of guilt. 
Closer reflection has resolved this apparently irreconc ilable contradiction almost too completely; what 
remained as the essential and common factor was that in each case we were dealing with an aggressiveness which had been displaced inwards. Clinical observation, moreover, allows us in fact to 
distinguish two sources for the aggressiveness which we attribute to the super-ego; one or the other of 
them exercises the stronger effect in any given case, but as a general rule they operate in unison.    This is, I think, the place at which to put forward for serious consideration a view which I have earlier 
recommended for provisional acceptance. In the most re cent analytic literature a predilection is shown for 
the idea that any kind of frustration, any thwarted instinctual satisfaction, results, or may result, in a 
heightening of the sense of guilt.¹ A great theoretical simplification will, I think, be achieved if we regard this as applying only to the aggressive  instincts, and little will be found to contradict this assumption. For how 
are we to account, on dynamic and economic grounds, for an increase in the sense of guilt appearing in place of an unfulfilled erotic  demand? This only seems possible in a round-about way - if we suppose, that 
is, that the prevention of an erotic satisfaction ca lls up a piece of aggressiveness against the person who 
has interfered with the satisfaction, and that this aggressiveness has itself to be suppressed in turn. But if this is so, it is after all only the aggressiveness which is transformed into a sense of guilt, by being suppressed and made over to the super-ego. I am convin ced that many processes will admit of a simpler 
and clearer exposition if the findings of psycho-analysis with regard to the derivation of the sense of guilt are restricted to the aggressive instincts. Examination of the clinical material gives us no unequivocal answer here, because, as our hypothesis tells us, the two classes of instinct hardly ever appear in a pure form, isolated from each other; but an investigation of extreme cases would probably point in the direction I 
anticipate. 
 
   ¹ This view is taken in particular by Ernest Jones, Susan Isaacs and Melanie Klein; and also, I understand, by Reik 
and Alexander.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4527  
 
   I am tempted to extract a first advantage from this more restricted view of the case by applying it to the 
process of repression. As we have learned, neurotic symptoms are, in their essence, substitutive 
satisfactions for unfulfilled sexual wishes. In the course of our analytic work we have discovered to our surprise that perhaps every neurosis conceals a quota of unconscious sense of guilt, which in its turn fortifies the symptoms by making use of them as a punishment. It now seems plausible to formulate the 
following proposition. When an instinctual trend undergoes repression, its libidinal elements are turned into 
symptoms, and its aggressive components into a sense of guilt. Even if this proposition is only an average approximation to the truth, it is worthy of our interest. 
 
   Some readers of this work may further have an impression that they have heard the formula of the struggle between Eros and the death instinct too often. It was alleged to characterize the process of 
civilization which mankind undergoes but it was also brought into connection with the development of the 
individual, and, in addition, it was said to have revealed the secret of organic life in general. We cannot, I think, avoid going into the relations of these three processes to one another. The repetition of the same formula is justified by the consideration that both the process of human civilization and of the development 
of the individual are also vital processes - which is to say that they must share in the most general 
characteristic of life. On the other hand, evidence of the presence of this general characteristic fails, for the very reason of its general nature, to help us to arrive at any differentiation, so long as it is not narrowed 
down by special qualifications. We can only be satisfied, therefore, if we assert that the process of 
civilization is a modification which the vital process exper iences under the influence of a task that is set it by 
Eros and instigated by Ananke - by the exigencies of reality; and that this task is one of uniting separate 
individuals into a community bound together by libidinal ties. When, however, we look at the relation between the process of human civilization and the devel opmental or educative process of individual human 
beings, we shall conclude without much hesitation that the two are very similar in nature, if not the very same process applied to different kinds of object. The process of the civilization of the human species is, of 
course, an abstraction of a higher order than is the dev elopment of the individual and it is therefore harder 
to apprehend in concrete terms, nor should we pursue analogies to an obsessional extreme; but in view of 
the similarity between the aims of the two processes - in the one case the integration of a separate 
individual into a human group, and in the other case the creation of a unified group out of many individuals - 
we cannot be surprised at the similarity bet ween the means employed and the resultant phenomena. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4528  
 
   In view of its exceptional importance, we must not long postpone the mention of one feature which 
distinguishes between the two processes. In the developmental process of the individual, the programme of 
the pleasure principle, which consists in finding the satisfaction of happiness, is retained as the main aim. Integration in, or adaptation to, a human community appears as a scarcely avoidable condition which must be fulfilled before this aim of happiness can be achieved. If it could be done without that condition, it would 
perhaps be preferable. To put it in other words, the development of the individual seems to us to be a product of the interaction between two urges, the urge towards happiness, which we usually call ‘egoistic’, and the urge towards union with others in the community, which we call ‘altruistic’. Neither of these 
descriptions goes much below the surface. In the process of individual development, as we have said, the 
main accent falls mostly on the egoistic urge (or the urge towards happiness); while the other urge, which may be described as a ‘cultural’ one, is usually content with the role of imposing restrictions. But in the 
process of civilization things are different. Here by far the most important thing is the aim of creating a unity 
out of the individual human beings. It is true that the ai m of happiness is still there, but it is pushed into the 
background. It almost seems as if the creation of a great human community would be most successful if no attention had to be paid to the happiness of the individual. The developmental process of the individual can 
thus be expected to have special features of its own which are not reproduced in the process of human 
civilization. It is only in so far as the first of these processes has union with the community as its aim that it 
need coincide with the second process.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4529  
 
   Just as a planet revolves around a central body as well as rotating on its own axis, so the human 
individual takes part in the course of development of mankind at the same time as he pursues his own path 
in life. But to our dull eyes the play of forces in  the heavens seems fixed in a never-changing order; in the 
field of organic life we can still see how the forces contend with one another, and how the effects of the conflict are continually changing. So, also, the two urges, the one towards personal happiness and the 
other towards union with other human beings, must struggle with each other in every individual; and so, 
also, the two processes of individual and of cultural development must stand in hostile opposition to each other and mutually dispute the ground. But this struggle between the individual and society is not a 
derivative of the contradiction - probably an irreconc ilable one - between the primal instincts of Eros and 
death. It is a dispute within the economics of the libido, comparable to the contest concerning the 
distribution of libido between ego and objects; and it does admit of an eventual accommodation in the individual, as, it may be hoped, it will also do in the future of civilization, however much that civilization may 
oppress the life of the individual to-day.    The analogy between the process of civilizati on and the path of individual development may be extended 
in an important respect. It can be asserted that the community, too, evolves a super-ego under whose 
influence cultural development proceeds. It would be a tempting task for anyone who has a knowledge of 
human civilizations to follow out this analogy in detail. I will confine myself to bringing forward a few striking points. The super-ego of an epoch of civilization has an or igin similar to that of an individual. It is based on 
the impression left behind by the personalities of great leaders - men of overwhelming force of mind or men in whom one of the human impulsions has found its strongest and purest, and therefore often its most one-sided, expression. In many instances the analogy goes st ill further, in that during their lifetime these figures 
were - often enough, even if not always - mocked and maltreated by others and even despatched in a cruel fashion. In the same way, indeed, the primal father did not attain divinity until long after he had met his death by violence. The most arresting example of this fateful conjunction is to be seen in the figure of Jesus Christ - if, indeed, that figure is not a part of mythology, which called it into being from an obscure memory 
of that primal event. Another point of agreement bet ween the cultural and the individual super-ego is that 
the former, just like the latter, sets up strict ideal demands, disobedience to which is visited with ‘fear of 
conscience’. Here, indeed, we come across the remarkable circumstance that the mental processes 
concerned are actually more familiar to us and more accessible to consciousness as they are seen in the 
group than they can be in the individual man. In him, when tension arises, it is only the aggressiveness of 
the super-ego which, in the form of reproaches, makes itself noisily heard; its actual demands often remain 
unconscious in the background. If we bring them to conscious knowledge, we find that they coincide with 
the precepts of the prevailing cultural super-ego. At th is point the two processes, that of the cultural 
development of the group and that of the cultural devel opment of the individual, are, as it were, always 
interlocked. For that reason some of the manifestat ions and properties of the super-ego can be more easily 
detected in its behaviour in the cultural community than in the separate individual.  
Civilization And Its Discontents4530  
 
   The cultural super-ego has developed its ideals and set up its demands. Among the latter, those which 
deal with the relations of human beings to one another are comprised under the heading of ethics. People 
have at all times set the greatest value on ethics, as though they expected that it in particular would produce especially important results. And it does in fa ct deal with a subject which can easily be recognized 
as the sorest spot in every civilization. Ethics is thus to be regarded as a therapeutic attempt - as an 
endeavour to achieve, by means of a command of the super-ego, something which has so far not been 
achieved by means of any other cultural activities. As we already know, the problem before us is how to get 
rid of the greatest hindrance to civilization - namely, the constitutional inclination of human beings to be 
aggressive towards one another; and for that very reason we are especially interested in what is probably 
the most recent of the cultural commands of t he super-ego, the commandment to love one’s neighbour as 
oneself. In our research into, and therapy of, a neurosis, we are led to make two reproaches against the 
super-ego of the individual. In the severity of its commands and prohibitions it troubles itself too little about 
the happiness of the ego, in that it takes insufficient account of the resistances against obeying them - of the instinctual strength of the id, and of the diffi culties presented by the real external environment. 
Consequently we are very often obliged, for therapeutic purposes, to oppose the super-ego, and we 
endeavour to lower its demands. Exactly the same objections can be made against the ethical demands of 
the cultural super-ego. It, too, does not trouble itself  enough about the facts of the mental constitution of 
human beings. It issues a command and does not ask whether it is possible for people to obey it. On the 
contrary, it assumes that a man’s ego is psychologically capable of anything that is required of it, that his 
ego has unlimited mastery over his id. This is a mist ake; and even in what are known as normal people the 
id cannot be controlled beyond certain limits. If more is demanded of a man, a revolt will be produced in him 
or a neurosis, or he will be made unhappy. The commandment, ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself’, is the 
strongest defence against human aggressiveness and an excellent example of the unpsychological proceedings of the cultural super-ego. The commandment is impossible to fulfil; such an enormous inflation of love can only lower its value, not get rid of the difficulty. Civilization pays no attention to all this; it merely 
admonishes us that the harder it is to obey the precept the more meritorious it is to do so. But anyone who 
follows such a precept in present-day civilization only puts himself at a disadvantage vis-à-vis  the person 
who disregards it. What a potent obstacle to civilization aggressiveness must be, if the defence against it 
can cause as much unhappiness as aggressiveness itself! ‘Natural’ ethics, as it is called, has nothing to 
offer here except the narcissistic satisfaction of being able to think oneself better than others. At this point the ethics based on religion introduces its promises of a better after-life. But so long as virtue is not 
rewarded here on earth, ethics will, I fancy, preach in vain. I too think it quite certain that a real change in 
the relations of human beings to possessions would be of more help in this direction than any ethical commands; but the recognition of this fact among socialists has been obscured and made useless for 
practical purposes by a fresh idealistic misconception of human nature. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4531  
 
   I believe the line of thought which seeks to trace in the phenomena of cultural development the part 
played by a super-ego promises still further discoveries. I hasten to come to a close. But there is one 
question which I can hardly evade. If the development of civilization has such a far-reaching similarity to the development of the individual and if it employs the same methods, may we not be justified in reaching the diagnosis that, under the influence of cultural urges, some civilizations, or some epochs of civilization - 
possibly the whole of mankind - have become ‘neurotic’? An analytic dissection of such neuroses might 
lead to therapeutic recommendations which could lay claim to great practical interest. I would not say that an attempt of this kind to carry psycho-analysis over to the cultural community was absurd or doomed to be 
fruitless. But we should have to be very cautious and not forget that, after all, we are only dealing with 
analogies and that it is dangerous, not only with men but al so with concepts, to tear them from the sphere 
in which they have originated and been evolved. Mor eover, the diagnosis of communal neuroses is faced 
with a special difficulty. In an individual neurosis we take as our starting-point the contrast that distinguishes the patient from his environment, which is assumed to be ‘normal’. For a group all of whose members are affected by one and the same disorder no such background could exist; it would have to be found elsewhere. And as regards the therapeutic application of our knowledge, what would be the use of the most 
correct analysis of social neuroses, since no one possesses authority to impose such a therapy upon the 
group? But in spite of all these difficulties, we may expect that one day someone will venture to embark upon a pathology of cultural communities. 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents4532  
 
 
   For a wide variety of reasons, it is very far from my intention to express an opinion upon the value of 
human civilization. I have endeavoured to guard myself agai nst the enthusiastic prejudice which holds that 
our civilization is the most precious thing that we possess or could acquire and that its path will necessarily 
lead to heights of unimagined perfection. I can at least lis ten without indignation to the critic who is of the 
opinion that when one surveys the aims of cultural endeavour and the means it employs, one is bound to come to the conclusion that the whole effort is not worth the trouble, and that the outcome of it can only be 
a state of affairs which the individual will be unable to tolerate. My impartiality is made all the easier to me 
by my knowing very little about all these things. One thing only do I know for certain and that is that man’s 
judgements of value follow directly his wishes for happiness - that, accordingly, they are an attempt to support his illusions with arguments. I should find it very understandable if someone were to point out the 
obligatory nature of the course of human civilization and were to say, for instance, that the tendencies to a 
restriction of sexual life or to the institution of a humanitarian ideal at the expense of natural selection were 
developmental trends which cannot be averted or turned as ide and to which it is best for us to yield as 
though they were necessities of nature. I know, too,  the objection that can be made against this, to the 
effect that in the history of mankind, trends such  as these, which were considered unsurmountable, have 
often been thrown aside and replaced by other trends. Thus I have not the courage to rise up before my 
fellow-men as a prophet, and I bow to their reproach that I can offer them no consolation: for at bottom that is what they are all demanding - the wildest revolutionaries no less passionately than the most virtuous 
believers.    The fateful question for the human species seems to me to be whether and to what extent their cultural 
development will succeed in mastering the disturbance of their communal life by the human instinct of 
aggression and self-destruction. It may be that in this respect precisely the present time deserves a special 
interest. Men have gained control over the forces of natur e to such an extent that with their help they would 
have no difficulty in exterminating one another to the last man. They know this, and hence comes a large 
part of their current unrest, their unhappiness and their mood of anxiety. And now it is to be expected that 
the other of the two ‘Heavenly Powers’, eternal Eros, will make an effort to assert himself in the struggle with his equally immortal adversary. But who can foresee with what success and with what result? 
 
Civilization And Its Discontents