2125  
 
NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS  
(1909) 
 2126  
 
Intentionally left blank 
 2127  
 
NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS  
 
The matter contained in the following pages will be of two kinds. In the first place I shall give some 
fragmentary extracts from the history of a case of obsessional neurosis. This case judged by its length, the 
injuriousness of its effects, and the patient’s own view of it, deserves to be classed as a moderately severe one; the treatment, which lasted for about a year, led to the complete restoration of the patient’s personality, and to the removal of his inhibitions. In the second place, starting out from this case, and also 
taking other cases into account which I have previously analysed, I shall make some disconnected 
statements of an aphoristic character upon the genesis and finer psychological mechanism of obsessional processes, and I shall thus hope to develop my first observations on the subject, published in 1896.¹ 
   A programme of this kind seems to me to require some justification. For it might otherwise be thought that 
I regard this method of making a communication as perfectly correct and as one to be imitated; whereas in reality I am only accommodating myself to obstacles, some external and others inherent in the subject, and 
I should gladly have communicated more if it had been right or possible for me to do so. I cannot give a 
complete history of the treatment, because that would involve my entering in detail into the circumstances of my patient’s life. The importunate interest of a capital city, focused with particular attention upon my medical activities, forbids my giving a faithful picture of the case. On the other hand I have come more and 
more to regard the distortions usually resorted to in such circumstances as useless and objectionable. If the 
distortions are slight, they fail in their object of protecting the patient from indiscreet curiosity; while if they go beyond this they require too great a sacrifice, for they destroy the intelligibility of the material, which 
depends for its coherence precisely upon the small details of real life. And from this latter circumstance 
follows the paradoxical truth that it is far easier to di vulge the patient’s most intimate secrets than the most 
innocent and trivial facts about him; for, whereas the former would not throw any light on his identity, the latter, by which he is generally recognized, would make it obvious to every one. 
 
   ¹ ‘Further Remarks on the Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’, 1896 b (Section II. ‘The Nature and Mechanism of 
Obsessional Neurosis’).  2128  
 
   Such is my excuse for having curtailed so drastically the history of this case and its treatment. And I can 
offer still more cogent reasons for having confined m yself to the statement only of some disconnected 
results of the psycho-analytic investigation of obsessional neuroses. I must confess that I have not yet 
succeeded in completely penetrating the complicated texture of a severe case of obsessional neurosis, and 
that, if I were to reproduce the analysis, it would be impossible for me to make the structure, such as by the 
help of analysis we know or suspect it to be, visible to others through the mass of therapeutic work 
superimposed upon it. What add so greatly to the difficult y of doing this are the resistances of the patients 
and the forms in which they are expressed. But even apart from this it must be admitted that an obsessional 
neurosis is in itself not an easy thing to understand - much less so than a case of hysteria. Actually, indeed, 
we should have expected to find the contrary. T he language of an obsessional neurosis - the means by 
which it expresses its secret thoughts - is, as it were, only a dialect of the language of hysteria; but it is a 
dialect in which we ought to be able to find our way about more easily, since it is more nearly related to the 
forms of expression adopted by our conscious thought t han is the language of hysteria. Above all, it does 
not involve the leap from a mental process to a somatic innervation - hysterical conversion - which can never be fully comprehensible to us. 
   Perhaps it is only because we are less familiar with obsessional neuroses that we do not find these 
expectations confirmed by the facts. Persons suffering from a severe degree of obsessional neurosis present themselves far less frequently for analytic treatment than hysterical patients. They dissimulate their 
condition in daily life, too, as long as they possibly can, and often call in a physician only when their 
complaint has reached such an advanced stage as, had they been suffering, for instance, from tuberculosis of the lungs, would have led to their being refused admission to a sanatorium. I make this comparison, 
moreover, because, as with the chronic infectious di sease which I have just mentioned, we can point to a 
number of brilliant therapeutic successes in severe no less than in light cases of obsessional neurosis, 
where these have been taken in hand at an early stage.    In these circumstances there is no alternative but to report the facts in the imperfect and incomplete 
fashion in which they are known and in which it is legitimate to communicate them. The crumbs of 
knowledge offered in these pages, though they have been laboriously enough collected, may not in themselves prove very satisfying; but they may serve as a starting-point for the work of other investigators, 
and common endeavour may bring the success which is perhaps beyond the reach of individual effort. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2129  
 
I 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CASE HISTORY 
 
A youngish man of university education introduced himself to me with the statement that he had suffered 
from obsessions ever since his childhood, but with particular intensity for the last four years. The chief 
features of his disorder were fears  that something might happen to two people of whom he was very fond - 
his father and a lady whom he admired. Besides this he was aware of compulsive impulses  - such as an 
impulse, for instance, to cut his throat with a razor; and further he produced prohibitions , sometimes in 
connection with quite unimportant things. He had wasted years, he told me, in fighting against these ideas of his, and in this way had lost much ground in the course of his life. He had tried various treatments, but 
none had been of any use to him except a course of hydrotherapy at a sanatorium near ---; and this, he 
thought, had probably only been because he had made an acquaintance there which had led to regular 
sexual intercourse. Here he had no opportunities of the sort, and he seldom had intercourse and only at irregular intervals. He felt disgust at prostitutes. Altogether, he said, his sexual life had been stunted; 
masturbation had played only a small part in it, in his sixteenth or seventeenth year. His potency was 
normal; he had first had intercourse at the age of twenty-six.    He gave me the impression of being a clear-headed and shrewd person. When I asked him what it was 
that made him lay such stress upon telling me about his sexual life, he replied that that was what he knew 
about my theories. Actually, however, he had read none of my writings, except that a short time before he 
had been turning over the pages of one of my books¹ and had come across the explanation of some 
curious verbal associations which had so much reminded him of some of his own ‘efforts of thought’ in 
connection with his ideas that he had decided to put himself in my hands.  
   ¹ The Psychopathology of Everyday Life . 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2130  
 
(A)  THE BEGINNING OF THE TREATMENT  
 
   The next day I made him pledge himself to submit to the one and only condition of the treatment - 
namely, to say everything that came into his head, even if it was unpleasant  to him, or seemed unimportant  
or irrelevant  or senseless. I then gave him leave to start his communications with any subject he pleased, 
and he began thus:¹ 
   He had a friend, he told me, of whom he had an extraordinarily high opinion. He used always to go to him 
when he was tormented by some criminal impulse, and ask him whether he despised him as a criminal. His friend used then to give him moral support by assuring him that he was a man of irreproachable conduct, 
and had probably been in the habit, from his youth onwards, of taking a dark view of his own life. At an 
earlier date, he went on, another person had exercised a similar influence over him. This was a nineteen-year-old student (he himself had been fourteen or fifteen at the time) who had taken a liking to him, and had 
raised his self-esteem to an extraordinary degree, so that he appeared to himself to be a genius. This 
student had subsequently become his tutor, and had suddenly altered his behaviour and begun treating him as though he were an idiot. At length he had noticed that the student was interested in one of his sisters, 
and had realized that he had only taken him up in order to gain admission into the house. This had been 
the first great blow of his life. 
   He then proceeded without any apparent transition:-  
   ¹ What follows is based upon notes made on the evening of the day of treatment, and adheres as closely as possible 
to my recollection of the patient’s words. - I feel obliged to offer a warning against the practice of noting down what the patient says during the actual time of treatment. The consequent withdrawal of the physician’s attention does the patient more harm than can be made up for by any increase in accuracy that may be achieved in the reproduction of his case history.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2131  
 
(B)  INFANTILE SEXUALITY  
 
   ‘My sexual life began very early. I can remember a scene during my fourth or fifth year. (From my sixth 
year onwards I can remember everything.) This scene came into my head quite distinctly, years later. We had a very pretty young governess called Fräulein Peter.¹ One evening she was lying on the sofa lightly dressed, and reading. I was lying beside her, and begged her to let me creep under her skirt. She told me I 
might, so long as I said nothing to any one about it. She had very little on, and I fingered her genitals and 
the lower part of her body, which struck me as very queer. After this I was left with a burning and tormenting curiosity to see the female body. I can still remember the intense excitement with which I waited at the 
Baths (which I was still allowed to go to with the governess and my sisters) for the governess to undress 
and get into the water. I can remember more things from my sixth year onwards. At that time we had another governess, who was also young and good-looking. She had abscesses on her buttocks which she 
was in the habit of pressing out at night. I used to wait eagerly for that moment, to appease my curiosity. It 
was just the same at the Baths - though Fräulein Lina was more reserved than her predecessor.’ (In reply to a question which I threw in, ‘As a rule,’ the patient told me, ‘I did not sleep in her room, but mostly with my parents.’) ‘I remember a scene which must have taken place when I was seven years old.² We were 
sitting together one evening - the governess, the cook, another servant-girl, myself and my brother, who 
was eighteen months younger than me. The young women were talking, and I suddenly became aware of Fräulein Lina saying: "It could be done with the little one; but Paul" (that was I) "is too clumsy, he would be 
sure to miss it." I did not understand clearly what was meant, but I felt the slight and began to cry. Lina 
comforted me, and told me how a girl, who had done something of the kind with a little boy she was in charge of, had been put in prison for several months. I do not believe she actually did anything wrong with 
me, but I took a great many liberties with her. When I got into her bed I used to uncover her and touch her, 
and she made no objections. She was not very intelligent, and clearly had very strong sexual cravings. At twenty-three she had already had a child. She afterwards married its father, so that to-day she is a Frau Hofrat. Even now I often see her in the street. 
 
   ¹ Dr. Alfred Adler, who was formerly an analyst, once drew attention in a privately delivered paper to the peculiar 
importance which attaches to the very first communications made by patients. Here is an instance of this. The patient’s 
opening words laid stress upon the influence exercised over him by men, that is to say, upon the part played in his life 
by homosexual object-choice; but immediately afterwards they touched upon a second motif , which was to become of 
great importance later on, namely, the conflict between m an and woman and the opposition of their interests. Even the 
fact that he remembered his first pretty governess by her surname, which happened to be a man’s first name, must be taken into account in this connection. In middle-class circles in Vienna it is more usual to call a governess by her first name, and it is by that name that she is more commonly remembered. 
   ² The patient subsequently admitted that this scene probably occurred one or two years later.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2132  
 
   ‘When I was six years old I already suffered from erections, and I know that once I went to my mother to 
complain about them. I know too that in doing so I had some misgivings to get over, for I had a feeling that 
there was some connection between this subject and my ideas and inquisitiveness, and at that time I used to have a morbid idea that my parents knew my thoughts; I explained this to myself by supposing that I had spoken them out loud, without having heard myself do it . I look on this as the beginning of my illness. There 
were certain people, girls, who pleased me very much, and I had a very strong wish to see them naked . But 
in wishing this I had an uncanny feeling, as though something must happen if I thought such things, and as 
though I must do all sorts of things to prevent it .’ 
   (In reply to a question he gave an example of these fears: ‘For instance, that my father might die .’) 
‘Thoughts about my father’s death occupied my mind from a very early age and for a long period of time, and greatly depressed me.’ 
   At this point I learnt with astonishment that the patient’s father, with whom his obsessional fears were, 
after all, occupied now, had died several years previously.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2133  
 
 
   The events in his sixth or seventh year which the patient described in the first hour of his treatment were 
not merely, as he supposed, the beginning of his illness, but were already the illness itself. It was a complete obsessional neurosis, wanting in no essential element, at once the nucleus and the prototype of the later disorder, - an elementary organism, as it were, the study of which could alone enable us to obtain 
a grasp of the complicated organization of his subsequent illness. The child, as we have seen, was under 
the domination of a component of the sexual instinct, t he desire to look, as a result of which there was a 
constant recurrence in him of a very intense wish connected with persons of the female sex who pleased 
him - the wish, that is, to see them naked. This wish corresponds to the later obsessional or compulsive idea; and if the quality of compulsion was not yet present in the wish, this was because the ego had not yet placed itself in complete opposition to it and did not yet regard it as something foreign to itself. 
Nevertheless, opposition to this wish from some source or other was already in activity, for its occurrence 
was regularly accompanied by a distressing affect.¹ A conflict was evidently in progress in the mind of this young libertine. Side by side with the obsessive wish, and intimately associated with it, was an obsessive fear: every time he had a wish of this kind he could not help fearing that something dreadful would happen. 
This something dreadful was already clothed in a characteristic indeterminateness which was 
thenceforward to be an invariable feature of every manife station of the neurosis. But in a child it is not hard 
to discover what it is that is veiled behind an indeterminateness of this kind. If the patient can once be 
induced to give a particular instance in place of the vague generalities which characterize an obsessional 
neurosis, it may be confidently assumed that the instance is the original and actual thing which has tried to 
hide itself behind the generalization. Our present patient ’s obsessive fear, therefore, when restored to its 
original meaning, would run as follows: ‘If I have this wish to see a woman naked, my father will be bound to die.’ The distressing affect was distinctly coloured with a tinge of uncanniness and superstition, and was already beginning to give rise to impulses to do something to ward off the impending evil. These impulses were subsequently to develop into the protective measures  which the patient adopted. 
 
   ¹ Yet attempts have been made to explain obsessions without taking the affects into account! 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2134  
 
   We find, accordingly: an erotic instinct and a revolt against it; a wish which has not yet become 
compulsive and, struggling against it, a fear which is already compulsive; a distressing affect and an 
impulsion towards the performance of defensive acts. T he inventory of the neurosis has reached its full 
muster. Indeed, something more is present, namely, a kind of delusion  or delirium with the strange content 
that his parents knew his thoughts because he spoke them out loud without his hearing himself do it. We 
shall not go far astray if we suppose that in making th is attempt at an explanation the child had some inkling 
of those remarkable mental processes which we describe as unconscious and which we cannot dispense 
with if we are to throw any scientific light upon this obscure subject. ‘I speak my thoughts out loud, without 
hearing them’ sounds like a projection into the exter nal world of our own hypothesis that he had thoughts 
without knowing anything about them; it sounds  like an endopsychic perception of what has been 
repressed. 
   For the situation is clear. This elementary neurosis of childhood already involved a problem and an 
apparent absurdity, like any complicated neurosis of maturity. What can have been the meaning of the 
child’s idea that if he had this lascivious wish his father would be bound to die? Was it sheer nonsense? Or are there means of understanding the words and of perce iving them as a necessary consequence of earlier 
events and premises?    If we apply knowledge gained elsewhere to this case of childhood neurosis, we shall not be able to avoid a suspicion that in this instance as in others (that is to say, before the child had reached his sixth year) 
there had been conflicts and repressions, which had them selves been overtaken by amnesia, but had left 
behind them as a residuum the particular content of this obsessive fear. Later on we shall learn how far it is 
possible for us to rediscover those forgotten experiences or to reconstruct them with some degree of 
certainty. In the meantime stress may be laid on the fact, which is probably more than a mere coincidence, 
that the patient’s infantile amnesia ended precisely with his sixth year.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2135  
 
   To find a chronic obsessional neurosis beginning like this in early childhood, with lascivious wishes of this 
sort connected with uncanny apprehensions and an inclinat ion to the performance of defensive acts, is no 
new thing to me. I have come across it in a number of other cases. It is absolutely typical, although 
probably not the only possible type. Before proceeding to the events of the second session, I should like to add one more word on the subject of the patient’s early sexual experiences. It will hardly be disputed that 
they may be described as having been considerable both in themselves and in their consequences. But it 
has been the same with the other cases of obsessional neurosis that I have had the opportunity of 
analysing. Such cases, unlike those of hysteria, invariably possess the characteristic of premature sexual 
activity. Obsessional neuroses make it much more obvious than hysterias that the factors which go to form 
a psychoneurosis are to be found in the patient’s infantile sexual life and not in his present one. The current 
sexual life of an obsessional neurotic may often appear perfectly normal to a superficial observer; indeed, it 
frequently offers to the eye far fewer pathogenic elements and abnormalities than in the instance we are 
now considering.  
(C)  THE GREAT OBSESSIVE FEAR  
 
   ‘I think I will begin to-day with the experience which was the immediate occasion of my coming to you. It 
was in August, during the manoeuvres in ---. I had been suffering before, and tormenting myself with all kinds of obsessional thoughts, but they had quickly passed off during the manoeuvres. I was keen to show 
the regular officers that people like me had not only learnt a good deal but could stand a good deal too. 
One day we started from --- on a short march. During a halt I lost my pince-nez, and, although I could easily have found them, I did not want to delay our start, so I gave them up. But I wired to my opticians in Vienna 
to send me another pair by the next post. During that same halt I sat between two officers, one of whom, a 
captain with a Czech name, was to be of no small importance to me. I had a kind of dread of him, for he 
was obviously fond of cruelty. I do not say he was a bad man, but at the officers’ mess he had repeatedly defended the introduction of corporal punishment, so that I had been obliged to disagree with him very 
sharply. Well, during this halt we got into conversation, and the captain told me he had read of a specially 
horrible punishment used in the East . . .’  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2136  
 
   Here the patient broke off, got up from the sofa, and begged me to spare him the recital of the details. I 
assured him that I myself had no taste whatever for cruelty, and certainly had no desire to torment him, but 
that naturally I could not grant him something which was beyond my power. He might just as well ask me to give him the moon. The overcoming of resistances was a law of the treatment, and on no consideration 
could it be dispensed with. (I had explained the idea of  ‘resistance’ to him at the beginning of the hour, 
when he told me there was much in himself which he would have to overcome if he was to relate this experience of his.) I went on to say that I would do all I could, nevertheless, to guess the full meaning of any hints he gave me. Was he perhaps thinking of impalement? - ‘No, not that; . . . the criminal was tied up 
. . .’ - he expressed himself so indistinctly that I could not immediately guess in what position - ‘a pot was 
turned upside down on his buttocks . . . some rats were put into it . . . and they . . .’ - he had again got up, 
and was showing every sign of horror and resistance - ‘. . . bored their way in . . .’ - Into his anus, I helped 
him out.    At all the more important moments while he was telling his story his face took on a very strange, composite expression. I could only interpret it as one of horror at pleasure of his own of which he himself 
was unaware. He proceeded with the greatest difficulty: ‘At that moment the idea flashed through my mind 
that this was happening to a person who was very dear to me .’¹ In answer to a direct question he said that it 
was not he himself who was carrying out the punishment, but that it was being carried out as it were 
impersonally. After a little prompting I learnt that the person to whom this ‘idea’ of his related was the lady 
whom he admired. 
  
   ¹ He said ‘idea’ - the stronger and more significant term ‘wish’, or rather ‘fear’, having evidently been censored. 
Unfortunately I am not able to reproduce the peculiar indeterminateness of all his remarks.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2137  
 
   He broke off his story in order to assure me that these thoughts were entirely foreign and repugnant to 
him, and to tell me that everything which had followed in their train had passed through his mind with the 
most extraordinary rapidity. Simultaneously with the idea there always appeared a ‘sanction’, that is to say, the defensive measure which he was obliged to adopt in order to prevent the phantasy from being fulfilled. 
When the captain had spoken of this ghastly punishment, he went on, and these ideas had come into his 
head, by employing his usual formulas (a ‘but’ accompanied by a gesture of repudiation, and the phrase 
‘whatever are you thinking of?’) he had just succeeded in warding off both of them. 
   This ‘both’ took me aback, and it has no doubt also mystified the reader. For so far we have heard only of 
one idea - of the rat punishment being carried out upon the lady. He was now obliged to admit that a 
second idea had occurred to him simultaneously, namely, the idea of the punishment being applied to his father. As his father had died many years previously, this obsessive fear was much more nonsensical even 
than the first, and accordingly it had attempted to escape being confessed to for a little while longer. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2138  
 
   That evening, he continued, the same captai n had handed him a packet that had arrived by the post and 
had said: ‘Lieutenant A.¹ has paid the charges for you. You must pay him back.’ The packet had contained 
the pince-nez that he had wired for. At that inst ant, however, a ‘sanction’ had taken shape in his mind, 
namely, that he was not to pay back the money  or it would happen - (that is, the phantasy about the rats 
would come true as regards his father and the lady). And immediately, in accordance with a type of 
procedure with which he was familiar, to combat this sanction there had arisen a command in the shape of 
a vow: ‘ You must pay back the 3.80 Kronen to Lieutenant A .’ He had said these words to himself almost 
half aloud. 
   Two days later the manoeuvres had come to an end. He had spent the whole of the intervening time in 
efforts at repaying Lieutenant A. the small amount in question; but a succession of difficulties of an apparently external  nature had arisen to prevent it. First he had tried to effect the payment though another 
officer who had been going to the post office. But he had been much relieved when this officer brought him back the money, saying that he had not met Lieutenant A. there, for this method of fulfilling his vow had not satisfied him, as it did not correspond with the wording, which ran: ‘You must pay back the money to Lieutenant A.’ Finally, he had met Lieutenant A., the person he was looking for; but that officer had refused 
to accept the money, declaring that he had not paid anything for him, and had nothing whatever to do with 
the post, which was the business of Lieutenant B. This had thrown my patient into great perplexity, for it 
meant that he was unable to keep his vow, since it had been based upon false premises. He had 
excogitated a very curious means of getting out of his difficulty, namely, that he should go to the post office 
with both the men, A. and B., that A. should give the young lady there the 3.80 kronen , that the young lady 
should give them to B., and that then he himself should pay back the 3.80 kronen  to A. according to the 
wording of his vow.  
   ¹ The names are of little consequence here. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2139  
 
   It would not surprise me to hear that at this point the reader had ceased to be able to follow. For even the 
detailed account which the patient gave me of the ex ternal events of these days and of his reactions to 
them was full of self-contradictions and sounded hopelessly confused. It was only when he told the story for 
the third time that I could get him to realize its obscurities and could lay bare the errors of memory and the displacements in which he had become involved. I s hall spare myself the trouble of reproducing these 
details, the essentials of which we shall easily be abl e to pick up later on, and I will only add that at the end 
of this second session the patient behaved as though he were dazed and bewildered. He repeatedly addressed me as ‘Captain’, probably because at the beginning of the hour I had told him that I myself was 
not fond of cruelty like Captain N., and that I had no intention of tormenting him unnecessarily. 
   The only other piece of information that I obtained from him during this hour was that from the very first, on all the previous occasions on which he had had a fear that something would happen to people he loved 
no less than on the present one, he had referred the punishments not only to our present life but also to 
eternity - to the next world. Up to his fourteenth or fifteenth year he had been devoutly religious, but from 
that time on he had gradually developed into the free-thinker that he was to-day. He reconciled the contradiction between his beliefs and his obsessions by saying to himself: ‘What do you know about the 
next world? Nothing can be known about it. You’re not risking anything - so do it.’ This form of argument 
seemed unobjectionable to a man who was in other respects particularly clear-headed, and in this way he 
exploited the uncertainty of reason in the face of these questions to the benefit of the religious attitude 
which he had outgrown. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2140  
 
 
   At the third session he completed his very characteristic story of his efforts at fulfilling his obsessional 
vow. That evening the last gathering of officers had taken place before the end of the manoeuvres. It had 
fallen to him to reply to the toast of ‘The Gentlemen of the Reserve’. He had spoken well, but as if he were in a dream, for at the back of his mind he was being incessantly tormented by his vow. He had spent a 
terrible night. Arguments and counter-arguments had struggled with one another. The chief argument, of 
course, had been that the premise upon which his vow had been based - that Lieutenant A. had paid the money for him - had proved to be false. However, he had consoled himself with the thought that the 
business was not yet finished, as A. would be riding with him next morning part of the way to the railway 
station at P--, so that he would still have time to ask him the necessary favour. As a matter of fact he had not done this, and had allowed A. to go off without him; but he had given instructions to his orderly to let A. 
know that he intended to pay him a visit that afternoon. He himself had reached the station at half-past nine 
in the morning. He had deposited his luggage there and had seen to various things he had to do in the small town, with the intention of afterwards paying his visit to A. The village in which A. was stationed was about an hour’s drive from the town of P--. The railway journey to the place where the post office was would 
take three hours. He had calculated, therefore, that t he execution of his complicated plan would just leave 
him time to catch the evening train from P--- to Vienna. The ideas that were struggling within him had been, 
on the one hand, that he was simply being cowardly and was obviously only trying to save himself the 
unpleasantness of asking A. to make the sacrifice in question and of cutting a foolish figure before him, and 
that that was why he was disregarding his vow; and, on the other hand, that it would, on the contrary, be cowardly of him to fulfil his vow, since he only wanted to do so in order to be left in peace by his 
obsessions. When in the course of his deliberations, the patient added, he found the arguments so evenly balanced as these, it was his custom to allow his actions to be decided by chance events as though by the 
hand of God. When, therefore, a porter at the station had addressed him with the words, ‘Ten o’clock train, sir? ‘ he had answered ‘Yes’, and in fact had gone off by the ten o’clock train. In this way he had produced 
fait accompli and felt greatly relieved. He had proceeded to book a seat for luncheon in the restaurant car. 
At the first station they had stopped at it had suddenly struck him that he still had time to get out, wait for the next down train, travel back in it to P--, drive to the place where Lieutenant A. was quartered, from there 
make the three hours’ train journey with him to the post office, and so forth. It had only been the 
consideration that he had booked his seat for luncheon with the steward of the restaurant car that had 
prevented his carrying out this design. He had not abandoned it, however; he had only put off getting out 
until a later stop. In this way he had struggled through from station to station, till he had reached one at 
which it had seemed to him impossible to get out because he had relatives living there. He had then determined to travel through to Vienna, to look up his friend there and lay the whole matter before him, and 
then, after his friend had made his decision, to catch the night train back to P--. When I expressed a doubt 
whether this would have been feasible, he assured me that he would have had half an hour to spare between the arrival of the one train and the departure of the other. When he had arrived in Vienna, however, he had failed to find his friend at the restaurant at which he had counted on meeting him, and had 
not reached his friend’s house till eleven o’clock at night. He told him the whole story that very night. His 
friend had held up his hands in amazement to think that he could still be in doubt whether he was suffering from an obsession, and had calmed him down for the night, so that he had slept excellently. Next morning 
they had gone together to the post office, to dispatch the 3.80 kronen  to the post office at which the packet 
containing the pince-nez had arrived. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2141  
 
   It was this last statement which provided me with a starting-point from which I could begin straightening 
out the various distortions involved in his story. After his friend had brought him to his senses he had 
dispatched the small sum of money in question neither to Lieutenant A. nor to Lieutenant B., but direct to the post office. He must therefore have known that he owed the amount of the charges due upon the 
packet to no one but the official at the post office , and he must have known this before he started on his 
journey. It turned out that in fact he had known it before the captain made his request and before he himself made his vow; for he now remembered that a few hours before meeting the cruel captain he had had 
occasion to introduce himself to another captain, who had told him how matters actually stood. This officer, 
on hearing his name, had told him that he had been at the post office a short time before, and that the 
young lady there had asked him whether he knew a Lieut enant L. (the patient, that is), for whom a packet 
had arrived, to be paid for on delivery. The officer had replied that he did not, but the young lady had been 
of opinion that she could trust the unknown lieutenant and had said that in the meantime she would pay the 
charges herself. It had been in this way that the patient had come into possession of the pince-nez he had 
ordered. The cruel captain had made a mistake when, as he handed him over the packet, he had asked him to pay back the 3.80 kronen to A., and the patient must have known it was a mistake. In spite of this he 
had made a vow founded upon this mistake, a vow that was bound to be a torment to him. In so doing he 
had suppressed to himself, just as in telling the story he had suppressed to me, the episode of the other captain and the existence of the trusting young lady at t he post office. I must admit that when this correction 
has been made his behaviour becomes even more senseless and unintelligible than before.    After he had left his friend and returned to his family his doubts had overtaken him afresh. His friend’s arguments, he saw, had been no different from his own, and he was under no delusion that his temporary 
relief was attributable to anything more than his friend’s personal influence. His determination to consult a 
doctor was woven into his delirium in the following ingenious manner. He thought he would get a doctor to give him a certificate to the effect that it was necessary for him, in order to recover his health, to perform some such action as he had planned in connection with Lieutenant A.; and the lieutenant would no doubt let 
himself be persuaded by the certificate into accepting the 3.80 crowns from him. The chance that one of my 
books happened to fall into his hands just at that moment directed his choice to me. There was no question of getting a certificate from me, however; all that he asked of me was, very reasonably, to be freed of his 
obsessions. Many months later, when his resistance was at its height, he once more felt a temptation to 
travel to P-- after all, to look up Lieutenant A. and to go through the farce of returning him the money.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2142  
 
(D)  INITIATION INTO THE NATURE OF THE TREATMENT 
 
   The reader must not expect to hear at once what light I have to throw upon the patient’s strange and 
senseless obsessions about the rats. The true technique of psycho-analysis requires the physician to suppress his curiosity and leaves the patient complete freedom in choosing the order in which topics shall succeed each other during the treatment. At the fourth session, accordingly, I received the patient with the 
question: ‘And how do you intend to proceed to-day?’ 
   ‘I have decided to tell you something which I consider most important and which has tormented me from the very first.’ He then told me at great length the story of the last illness of his father, who had died of 
emphysema nine years previously. One evening, thinking that the condition was one which would come to 
a crisis, he had asked the doctor when the danger could be regarded as over. ‘The evening of the day after to-morrow’, had been the reply. It had never entered his head that his father might not survive that limit. At 
half-past eleven at night he had lain down for an hour’s rest. He had woken up at one o’clock, and had 
been told by a medical friend that his father had died. He had reproached himself with not having been present at his death; and the reproach had been intensified when the nurse told him that his father had spoken his name once during the last days, and had said to her as she came up to the bed: ‘Is that Paul?’ 
He had thought he noticed that his mother and sisters had been inclined to reproach themselves in a similar 
way; but they had never spoken about it. At first, how ever, the reproach had not tormented him. For a long 
time he had not realized the fact of his father ’s death. It had constantly happened that, when he heard a 
good joke, he would say to himself: ‘I must tell Father that.’ His imagination, too, had been occupied with 
his father, so that often, when there was a knock at the door, he would think: ‘Here comes Father’, and when he walked into a room he would expect to find his father in it. And although he had never forgotten 
that his father was dead, the prospect of seeing a ghostly apparition of this kind had had no terrors for him; 
on the contrary, he had greatly desired it. It had not been until eighteen months later that the recollection of his neglect had recurred to him and begun to torment him terribly, so that he had come to treat himself as a criminal. The occasion of this happening had been the death of an aunt by marriage and of a visit of 
condolence that he had paid at her house. From that time forward he had extended the structure of his 
obsessional thoughts so as to include the next world.  The immediate consequence of this development had 
been that he became seriously incapacitated from working. ¹ He told me that the only thing that had kept 
him going at that time had been the consolation given him by his friend, who had always brushed his self-reproaches aside on the ground that they were grossly exaggerated. Hearing this, I took the opportunity of 
giving him a first glance at the underlying principles of psycho-analytic therapy. When there is a 
mésalliance, I began, between an affect and its ideational content (in this instance, between the intensity of 
the self-reproach and the occasion for it ), a layman will say that the affect is too great for the occasion - that it is exaggerated and that consequently the infer ence following from the self-reproach (the inference 
that the patient is a criminal) is false. On the contrary, the physician says: ‘No. The affect is justified. The 
sense of guilt is not in itself open to further criticis m. But it belongs to some other content, which is unknown 
(unconscious ), and which requires to be looked for. The known ideational content has only got into its 
actual position owing to a false connection. We are not  used to feeling strong affects without their having 
any ideational content, and therefore, if the content is missing, we seize as a substitute upon some other 
content which is in some way or other suitable, much as our police, when they cannot catch the right murderer, arrest a wrong one instead. Moreover, this fact of there being a false connection is the only way 
of accounting for the powerlessness of logical processes to combat the tormenting idea.’ I concluded by 
admitting that this new way of looking at the matter gave immediate rise to some hard problems; for how could he admit that his self-reproach of being a criminal towards his father was justified, when he must know that as a matter of fact he had never committed any crime against him? 
 
   ¹ A more detailed description of the episode, which the patient gave me later on, made it possible to understand the 
effect that it produced on him. His uncle, lamenting the loss of his wife, had exclaimed: ‘Other men allow themselves 
every possible indulgence, but I lived for this woman alone!’ The patient had assumed that his uncle was alluding to his father and was casting doubts upon his conjugal fidelity; and although his uncle had denied this construction of his words most positively, it was no longer possible to counteract their effect.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2143  
 
 
   At the next session the patient showed great interest in what I had said, but ventured, so he told me, to 
bring for ward a few doubts. - How, he asked, could t he information that the self-reproach, the sense of 
guilt, was justified have a therapeutic effect? - I explained that it was not the information that had this effect, but the discovery of the unknown content to which the self-reproach was really attached. - Yes, he said, 
that was the precise point to which his question had been directed. - I then made some short observations 
upon the psychological differences between the conscious and the unconscious , and upon the fact that 
everything conscious was subject to a process of wearing-away, while what was unconscious was relatively 
unchangeable; and I illustrated my remarks by pointing to the antiques standing about in my room. They 
were, in fact, I said, only objects found in a tomb, and their burial had been their preservation: the destruction of Pompeii was only beginning now that it had been dug up. - Was there any guarantee, he next 
enquired, of what one’s attitude would be towards what was discovered? One man, he thought, would no 
doubt behave in such a way as to get the better of his self-reproach, but another would not. - No, I said, it followed from the nature of the circumstances that in every case the affect would be overcome - for the most part during the progress of the work itself. Every effort was made to preserve Pompeii, whereas 
people were anxious to be rid of tormenting ideas like his. - He had said to himself, he went on, that a self-
reproach could only arise from a breach of a person’s own inner moral principles and not from that of any external ones. - I agreed, and said that the man who merely breaks an external law often regards himself 
as a hero. - Such an occurrence, he continued, was thus only possible where a disintegration of the 
personality  was already present. Was there a possibility of his effecting a reintegration of his personality? If 
this could be done, he thought he would be able to make a success of his life, perhaps more of one than 
most people. - I replied that I was in complete agreement with this notion of a splitting of his personality. He 
had only to assimilate this new contrast, between a moral self and an evil one, with the contrast I had already mentioned, between the conscious and the unconsci ous. The moral self was the conscious, the evil 
self was the unconscious.¹ - He then said that, though he considered himself a moral person, he could quite 
definitely remember having done things in his childhood  which came from his other self. - I remarked that 
here he had incidentally hit upon one of the chief characteristics of the unconscious, namely, its relation to 
the infantile. The unconscious, I explained, was  the infantile; it was that part of the self which had become 
separated off from it in infancy, which had not shar ed the later stages of its development, and which had in 
consequence become repressed. It was the derivatives of this repressed unconscious that were 
responsible for the involuntary thoughts which constituted his illness. He might now, I added, discover yet 
another characteristic of the unconscious; it was a discovery which I should be glad to let him make for 
himself. - He found nothing more to say in this immediate connection, but instead he expressed a doubt whether it was possible to undo modifications of such long standing. What, in particular, could be done 
against his idea about the next world, for it could not be refuted by logic? - I told him I did not dispute the 
gravity of his case nor the significance of his pathological constructions; but at the same time his youth was very much in his favour as well as the intactness of his personality. In this connection I said a word or two upon the good opinion I had formed of him, and this gave him visible pleasure. 
 
   ¹ All of this is of course only true in the roughest way, but it serves as a first introduction to the subject. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2144  
 
 
   At the next session he began by saying that he must tell me an event in his childhood. From the age of 
seven, as he had already told me, he had had a fear that his parents guessed his thoughts, and this fear had in fact persisted all through his life. When he was twelve years old he had been in love with a little girl, the sister of a friend of his. (In answer to a question he said that his love had not been sensual; he had not 
wanted to see her naked for she was too small.) But she had not shown him as much affection as he had 
desired. And thereupon the idea had come to him that she would be kind to him if some misfortune were to befall him; and as an instance of such a misfortune his father’s death had forced itself upon his mind. He 
had at once rejected the idea with energy. And even now he could not admit the possibility that what had 
arisen in this way could have been a ‘wish’; it had clearly been no more than a ‘train of thought’¹ - By way of 
objection I asked him why, if it had not been a wish, he had repudiated it. - Merely, he replied, on account of 
the content of the idea, the notion that his father mi ght die. - I remarked that he was treating the phrase as 
though it were one that involved lèse-majesté; it was well known, of course, that it was equally punishable 
to say ‘The Emperor is an ass’ or to disguise the forbidden words by saying ‘If any one says, etc., . . . then he will have me to reckon with.’ I added that I could easily insert the idea which he had so energetically 
repudiated into a context which would exclude the possib ility of any such repudiation: for instance, ‘If my 
father dies, I shall kill myself upon his grave.’ - He was shaken, but did not abandon his objection. I 
therefore broke off the argument with the remark that I felt sure this had not been the first occurrence of his 
idea of his father’s dying; it had evidently origi nated at an earlier date, and some day we should have to 
trace back its history. - He then proceeded to tell me that a precisely similar thought had flashed through his mind a second time, six months before his father’s death. At that time² he had already been in love with his 
lady, but financial obstacles made it impossible to think of an alliance with her. The idea had then occurred 
to him that his father’s death might make him rich enough to marry her . In defending himself against this 
idea he had gone to the length of wishing that his father  might leave him nothing at all, so that he might 
have no compensation for his terrible loss. The same idea, though in a much milder form, had come to him 
for a third time, on the day before his father’s death. He had then thought: ‘Now I may be going to lose what 
I love most’; and then had come the contradiction: ‘No, there is some one else whose loss would be even more painful to you.’³ These thoughts surprised him very much, for he was quite certain that his father’s 
death could never have been an object of his desire but only of his fear. - After his forcible enunciation of 
these words I thought it advisable to bring a fresh piece of theory to his notice. According to psycho-analytic theory, I told him, every fear corresponded to a former wish which was now repressed; we were therefore 
obliged to believe the exact contrary of what he had asserted. This would also fit in with another theoretical 
requirement, namely, that the unconscious must be the precise contrary of the conscious. - He was much 
agitated at this and very incredulous. He wondered how he could possibly have had such a wish, 
considering that he loved his father more than any one else in the world; there could be no doubt that he 
would have renounced all his own prospects of happiness if by so doing he could have saved his father’s 
life. - I answered that it was precisely such intense love as his that was the necessary precondition of the repressed hatred. In the case of people to whom he felt indifferent he would certainly have no difficulty in 
maintaining side by side inclinations to a moderate liking and to an equally moderate dislike: supposing, for 
instance, that he were an official, he might think that his chief was agreeable as a superior, but at the same 
time pettifogging as a lawyer and inhuman as a judge. (Shakespeare makes Brutus speak in a similar way 
of Julius Caesar: ‘As Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was valiant, 
I honour him; but, as he was ambitious, I slew him.’ But these words already strike us as rather strange, and for the very reason that we had imagined Brutus’s feeling for Caesar as something deeper.) In the case 
of some one who was closer to him, of his wife for instance, he would wish his feelings to be unmixed, and 
consequently, as was only human, he would overlook her f aults, since they might make him dislike her - he 
would ignore them as though he were blind to them. So it was precisely the intensity of his love that would not allow his hatred - though to give it such a name was to caricature the feeling - to remain conscious. To 
be sure, the hatred must have a source, and to discover that source was certainly a problem; his own 
statements pointed to the time when he was afraid that his parents guessed his thoughts. On the other hand, too, it might be asked why this intense love of his had not succeeded in extinguishing his hatred, as 
usually happened where there were two opposing impulses.  We could only presume that the hatred must 
flow from some source, must be connected with some particular cause, which made it indestructible. On the 
one hand, then, some connection of this sort must be keeping his hatred for his father alive, while on the 
other hand, his intense love prevented it from becoming conscious. Therefore nothing remained for it but to 
exist in the unconscious, though it was able from time to time to flash out for a moment into consciousness.  
   ¹ Obsessional neurotics are not the only people who are satisfied with euphemisms of this kind. 
   ² That is, ten years ago. 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis   ³ There is here an unmistakable indication of an opposition between the two objects of his love, his father and the 
‘lady’. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2145  
 
   He admitted that all of this sounded quite plausible , but he was naturally not in the very least convinced 
by it.¹ He would venture to ask, he said, how it was that an idea of this kind could have remissions, how it 
could appear for a moment when he was twelve years old, and again when he was twenty, and then once more two years later, this time for good. He could not believe that his hostility had been extinguished in the intervals, and yet during them there had been no sign of self-reproaches. - To this I replied that whenever 
any one asked a question like that, he was already prepared with an answer; he needed only to be 
encouraged to go on talking. - He then proceeded, somew hat disconnectedly as it seemed, to say that he 
had been his father’s best friend, and that his father had been his. Except on a few subjects, upon which 
fathers and sons usually hold aloof from one another - (What could he mean by that ?) -, there had been a 
greater intimacy between them than there now was between him and his best friend. As regards the lady 
for whose sake he had sacrificed his father in that idea of his, it was true that he had loved her very much, 
but he had never felt really sensual wishes towards her, such as he had constantly had in his childhood. 
Altogether, in his childhood his sensual impulses had been much stronger than during his puberty. - At this I told him I thought he had now produced the answer we were waiting for, and had at the same time discovered the third great characteristic of the unconscious. The source from which his hostility to his father 
derived its indestructibility was evidently something in the nature of sensual desires , and in that connection 
he must have felt his father as in some way or other an interference. A conflict of this kind, I added, 
between sensuality and childish love was entirely typical. The remissions he had spoken of had occurred because the premature explosion of his sensual feelings had had as its immediate consequence a 
considerable diminution of their violence. It was not until he was once more seized with intense erotic desires that his hostility reappeared again owing to the revival of the old situation. I then got him to agree 
that I had not led him on to the subject either of childhood or of sex, but that he had raised them both of his 
own free will. - He then went on to ask why he had not simply come to a decision, at the time he was in love with the lady, that his father’s interference with that love could not for a moment weigh against his love of his father. - I replied that it was scarcely possible to destroy a person in absentia . Such a decision would 
only have been possible if the wish that he took objection to had made its first appearance on that occasion; whereas, as a matter of fact, it was a long-repressed wish, towards which he could not behave 
otherwise than he had formerly done, and which was cons equently immune from destruction. This wish (to 
get rid of his father as being an interference) must have originated at a time when circumstances had been very different - at a time, perhaps, when he had not loved his father more than the person whom he desired sensually, or when he was incapable of making a clear decision. It must have been in his very early 
childhood, therefore, before he had reached the age of six, and before the date at which his memory 
became continuous; and things must have remained in the same state ever since. - With this piece of 
construction our discussion was broken off for the time being. 
 
   ¹ It is never the aim of discussions like this to create conviction. They are only intended to bring the repressed 
complexes into consciousness, to set the conflict going in the field of conscious mental activity, and to facilitate the 
emergence of fresh material from the unconscious. A sense of conviction is only attained after the patient has himself worked over the reclaimed material, and so long as he is not fully convinced the material must be considered as unexhausted.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2146  
 
 
   At the next session, which was the seventh, he took up the same subject once more. He could not 
believe, he said, that he had ever entertained such a wish against his father. He remembered a story of 
Sudermann’s, he went on, that had made a deep impression upon him. In this story there was a woman who, as she sat by her sister’s sick-bed, felt a wish that her sister should die so that she herself might marry 
her husband. The woman thereupon committed suicide, thinking she was not fit to live after being guilty of 
such baseness. He could understand this, he said, and it would be only right if his thoughts were the death of him, for he deserved nothing less.¹ - I remarked that  it was well known to us that patients derived a 
certain satisfaction from their sufferings, so that in reality they all resisted their own recovery to some extent. He must never lose sight of the fact that a treatment like ours proceeded to the accompaniment of a 
constant resistance ; I should be repeatedly reminding him of this fact. 
   He then went on to say that he would like to speak of a criminal act, whose author he did not recognize as himself, though he quite clearly recollected committing it. He quoted a saying of Nietzsche’s:² ‘"I did this," says my Memory. "I cannot have done this," says my Pride and remains inexorable. In the end - Memory yields.’ ‘Well,’ he continued, ‘my memory has not yielded on this point.’ - ‘That is because you derive 
pleasure from your self-reproaches as a means of self-punishment.’ - ‘My younger brother - I am really very fond of him now, and he is causing me a great deal of worry just at present, for he wants to make what I consider a preposterous match; I have thought befor e now of going and killing the person concerned so as 
to prevent his marrying her -well, my younger brother and I used to fight a lot when we were children. We were very fond of each other at the same time, and were inseparable; but I was plainly filled with jealousy, as he was the stronger and better-looking of the two and consequently the favourite.’ - ‘Yes. You have 
already given me a description of a scene of jealousy in connection with Fräulein Lina.’ - ‘Very well then, on 
some such occasion (it was certainly before I was eight years old, for I was not going to school yet, which I began to do when I was eight) - on some such occasion, this is what I did. We both had toy guns of the usual make. I loaded mine with the ram rod and told him that if he looked up the barrel he would see 
something. Then, while he was looking in, I pulled the trigger. He was hit on the forehead and not hurt; but I 
had meant to hurt him very much indeed. Afterwards I was quite beside myself, and threw myself on the ground and asked myself however I could have done such a thing. But I did do it.’ - I took the opportunity of 
urging my case. If he had preserved the recollection of an action so foreign to him as this, he could not, I maintained, deny the possibility of something similar, which he had now forgotten entirely, having happened at a still earlier age in relation to his father. - He then told me he was aware of having felt other vindictive 
impulses, this time towards the lady he admired so much, of whose character he painted a glowing picture. 
It might be true, he said, that she could not love easily; but she was reserving her whole self for the one man to whom she would some day belong. She did not love him. When he had become certain of that, a 
conscious phantasy had taken shape in his mind of how he should grow very rich and marry some one 
else, and should then take her to call on the lady in order to hurt her feelings. But at that point the phantasy had broken down, for he had been obliged to own to himself that the other woman, his wife, was completely indifferent to him; then his thoughts had become confused, till finally it had been clearly borne in upon him 
that this other woman would have to die. In this phantasy, just as in his attempt upon his brother, he 
recognized the quality of cowardice which was so particularly horrible to him.³ - In the further course of our 
conversation I pointed out to him that he ought logically to consider himself as in no way responsible for any 
of these traits in his character; for all of these reprehensible impulses originated from his infancy, and were 
only derivatives of his infantile character surviving in his unconscious; and he must know that moral responsibility could not be applied to children. It was only by a process of development, I added, that a 
man, with his moral responsibility, grew up out of the sum of his infantile predispositions.
4 He expressed a 
doubt, however, whether all his evil impulses had originated from that source. But I promised to prove it to 
him in the course of the treatment.    He went on to adduce the fact of his illness having become so enormously intensified since his father’s 
death; and I said I agreed with him in so far as I regarded his sorrow at his father’s death as the chief 
source of the intensity  of his illness. His sorrow had found, as it were, a pathological expression in his 
illness. Whereas, I told him, a normal period of mourning would last from one to two years, a pathological 
one like this would last indefinitely. 
    This is as much of the present case history as I am able to report in a detailed and consecutive manner. It 
coincides roughly with the expository portion of the treatment; this lasted in all for more than eleven months. 
 
   ¹ This sense of guilt involves the most glaring contradiction of his opening denial that he had ever entertained such an 
evil wish against his father. This is a common type of reaction to repressed material which has become conscious: the 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis‘No’ with which the fact is first denied is immediately followed by a confirmation of it, though, to begin with, only an 
indirect one. 
   ² Jenseits von Gut und Böse , iv. 68. 
   ³ This quality of his will find an explanation later on. 
   4 I only produced these arguments so as once more to demonstrate to myself their inefficacy. I cannot understand 
how other psychotherapists can assert that they successfully combat neuroses with such weapons as these. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2147  
 
(E)  SOME OBSESSIONAL IDEAS AND THEIR EXPLANATION  
 
   Obsessional ideas, as is well known, have an appearance of being either without motive or without 
meaning, just a dreams have. The first problem is how to give them a sense and a status in the subject’s mental life, so as to make them comprehensible and even obvious. The problem of translating them may seem insoluble; but we must never let ourselves be misled by that illusion. The wildest and most eccentric 
obsessional ideas can be cleared up if they are investigated deeply enough. The solution is effected by 
bringing the obsessional ideas into temporal relationship with the patient’s experiences, that is to say, by 
enquiring when a particular obsessional idea made its first appearance and in what external circumstances 
it is apt to recur. When, as so often happens, an obs essional idea has not succeeded in establishing itself 
permanently, the task of clearing it up is correspondingly simplified. We can easily convince ourselves that, 
when once the interconnections between an obsessional  idea and the patient’s experiences have been 
discovered, there will be no difficulty in obtaining access to whatever else may be puzzling or worth knowing in the pathological structure we are dealing with - its meaning, the mechanism of its origin, and its derivation from the preponderant motive forces of the patient’s mind.    As a particularly clear example I will begin with one of the suicidal impulses  which appeared so frequently 
in our patient. This instance almost analysed itself in the telling. He had once, he told me, lost some weeks of study owing to his lady’s absence: she had gone away to nurse her grandmother, who was seriously ill. Just as he was in the middle of a very hard piece of work the idea had occurred to him: ‘If you received a 
command to take your examination this term at the first possible opportunity, you might manage to obey it. 
But if you were commanded to cut your throat with a razor, what then?’ He had at once become aware that this command had already been given, and was hurrying to the cupboard to fetch his razor when he 
thought: ‘No, it’s not so simple as that. You must¹ go and kill the old woman.’ Upon that, he had fallen to the 
ground, beside himself with horror.    In this instance the connection between the compulsive idea and the patient’s life is contained in the opening words of his story. His lady was absent, while he was working very hard for an examination so as 
to bring the possibility of an alliance with her nearer. While he was working he was overcome by a longing 
for his absent lady, and he thought of the cause of her  absence. And now there came over him something 
which, if he had been a normal man, would probably have been some kind of feeling of annoyance with her 
grandmother: ‘Why must the old woman get ill just at the very moment when I’m longing for her so 
frightfully?’ We must suppose that something similar but far more intense passed through our patient’s mind 
- an unconscious fit of rage which could combine with his longing and find expression in the exclamation: 
‘Oh, I should like to go and kill that old woman for robbing me of my love!’ Thereupon followed the 
command : ‘Kill yourself, as a punishment for these savage and murderous passions!’ The whole process then passed into the obsessional patient’s consciousness accompanied by the most violent affect and in a reverse order  - the punitive command coming first, and the mention of the guilty outburst afterwards. I 
cannot think that this attempt at an explanation will seem forced or that it involves many hypothetical elements.  
   ¹ The sense requires that the word ‘first’ should be interpolated here. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2148  
 
   Another impulse, which might be described as indirectly  suicidal and which was of longer duration, was 
not so easily explicable. For its relation to the patient’s experiences succeeded in concealing itself behind 
one of those purely external associations which are so obnoxious to our consciousness. One day while he was away on his summer holidays the idea suddenly occurred to him that he was too fat [German ‘ dick’] 
and that he must make himself slimmer . So he began getting up from table before the pudding came round 
and tearing along the road without a hat in the blazing heat of an August sun. Then he would dash up a mountain at the double, till, dripping with perspiration, he was forced to come to a stop. On one occasion his suicidal intentions actually emerged without any disguise from behind this mania for slimming: as he 
was standing on the edge of a steep precipice he suddenly received a command to jump over, which would have been certain death. Our patient could think of no explanation of this senseless obsessional behaviour 
until it suddenly occurred to him that at that time his lady had also been stopping at the same resort; but 
she had been in the company of an English cousin, who was very attentive to her and of whom the patient 
had been very jealous. This cousin’s name was Richard, and, according to the usual practice in England, he was known as Dick. Our patient, then, had wanted to kill this Dick; he had been far more jealous of him and enraged with him than he could admit to himself, and that was why he had imposed on himself this 
course of slimming by way of a punishment. This obsessional impulse may seem very different from the 
directly suicidal command which was discussed above, but they have nevertheless one important feature in 
common. For they both arose as reactions to a tremendous feeling of rage, which was inaccessible to the 
patient’s consciousness and was directed against some one who had cropped up as an interference with 
the course of his love.¹  
   ¹ Names and words are not nearly so frequently or so recklessly employed in obsessional neuroses as in hysteria for 
the purpose of establishing a connection between unconscious thoughts (whether they are impulses or phantasies) and symptoms. I happen, however, to recollect another instance in which the very same name, Richard, was similarly used by a patient whom I analysed a long time since. After a quarrel with his brother he began brooding over the best means of getting rid of his fortune, and declaring that he did not want to have anything more to do with money, and so on. His brother was called Richard, and ‘ richard’ is the French for ‘a rich man’. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2149  
 
   Some other of the patient’s obsessions, however, though they too were centred upon his lady, exhibited a 
different mechanism and owed their origin to a different instinct. Besides his slimming mania he produced a 
whole series of other obsessional activities at the period during which the lady was stopping at his summer resort; and, in part at least, these directly related to her. One day, when he was out with her in a boat and there was a stiff breeze blowing, he was obliged to make her put on his cap, because a command had been 
formulated in his mind that nothing must happen to her.¹ This was a kind of obsession for protecting , and it 
bore other fruit besides this. Another time, as they were sitting together during a thunderstorm, he was 
obsessed, he could not tell why, with the necessity for counting up to forty or fifty between each flash of 
lightning and its accompanying thunder-clap. On the day of her departure he knocked his foot against a stone lying in the road, and was obliged  to put it out of the way by the side of the road, because the idea 
struck him that her carriage would be driving along the same road in a few hours’ time and might come to 
grief against this stone. But a few minutes later it occurred to him that this was absurd, and he was obliged  
to go back and replace the stone in its original position in the middle of the road. After her departure he 
became a prey to an obsession for understanding , which made him a curse to all his companions. He 
forced himself to understand the precise meaning of ev ery syllable that was addressed to him, as though 
he might otherwise be missing some priceless treasure. Accordingly he kept asking: ‘What was it you said just then?‘ And after it had been repeated to him he could not help thinking it had sounded different the first time, so he remained dissatisfied. 
 
   ¹ The words ‘for which he might be to blame’ must be added to complete the sense. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2150  
 
   All of these products of his illness depended upon a ce rtain circumstance which at that time dominated 
his relations to his lady. When he had been taking leave of her in Vienna before the summer holidays, she 
had said something which he had construed into a desire on her part to disown him before the rest of the company; and this had made him very unhappy. During her stay at the holiday resort there had been an opportunity for discussing the question, and the lady had been able to prove to him that these words of hers 
which he had misunderstood had on the contrary been intended to save him from looking ridiculous. This 
made him very happy again. The clearest allusion to this incident was contained in the obsession for understanding. It was constructed as though he were saying to himself: ‘After such an experience you must 
never misunderstand any one again, if you want to spar e yourself unnecessary distress.’ This resolution 
was not merely a generalization from a single occasion, but it was also displaced - perhaps on account of 
the lady’s absence - from a single highly valued individual on to all the remaining inferior ones. And the 
obsession cannot have arisen solely from his satisfac tion at the explanation she had given him; it must 
have expressed something else besides, for it ended in an unsatisfying doubt as to whether what he had 
heard had been correctly repeated.    The other compulsive commands that have been mentioned put us upon the track of this other element. 
His obsession for protecting can only have been a reaction - as an expression of remorse and penitence - 
to a contrary, that is a hostile, impulse which he mu st have felt towards his lady before they had their 
éclaircissement . His obsession for counting during the thunderstorm can be interpreted, with the help of 
some material which he produced, as having been a def ensive measure against fears that some one was in 
danger of death. The analysis of the obsessions which we first considered has already warned us to regard our patient’s hostile impulses as particularly violent and as being in the nature of senseless rage; and now 
we find that even after their reconciliation his rage against the lady continued to play a part in the formation 
of his obsessions. His doubting mania as to whether he had heard correctly was an expression of the doubt still lurking in his mind, whether he had really understood his lady correctly this time and whether he had been justified in taking her words as a proof of her affection for him. The doubt implied in his obsession for 
understanding was a doubt of her love. A battle between love and hate was raging in the lover’s breast, and 
the object of both these feelings was one and the same person. The battle was represented in a plastic form by his compulsive and symbolic act of removing the stone from the road along which she was to drive, 
and then of undoing this deed of love by replacing the stone where it had lain, so that her carriage might 
come to grief against it and she herself be hurt. We shall not be forming a correct judgement of this second part of the compulsive act if we take it at its face value as having merely been a critical repudiation of a 
pathological action. The fact that it was accompanied by  a sense of compulsion betrays it as having itself 
been a part of the pathological action, though a part which was determined by a motive contrary to that 
which produced the first part. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2151  
 
   Compulsive acts like this, in two successive stages, of which the second neutralizes the first, are a typical 
occurrence in obsessional neuroses. The patient’s consciousness naturally misunderstands them and puts 
forward a set of secondary motives to account for them - rationalizes  them, in short. (Cf. Jones, 1908.) But 
their true significance lies in their being a representation of a conflict between two opposing impulses of approximately equal strength: and hitherto I have invariably found that this opposition has been one 
between love and hate. Compulsive acts of this sort are theoretically of special interest, for they show us a 
new type of method of constructing symptoms. What regularly occurs in hysteria is that a compromise is 
arrived at which enables both the opposing tendencies to  find expression simultaneously - which kills two 
birds with one stone;¹ whereas here each of the two opposing tendencies finds satisfaction singly, first one and then the other, though naturally an attempt is made to  establish some sort of logical connection (often 
in defiance of all logic) between the antagonists.² 
 
   ¹ Cf. ‘Hysterical Phantasies and their Relation to Bisexuality’ (Freud, 1908 a). 
   ² Another obsessional patient once told me the following story. He was walking one day in the park at Schönbrunn 
when he kicked his foot against a branch that was lying on the ground. He picked it up and flung it into the hedge that 
bordered the path. On his way home he was suddenly seized with uneasiness that the branch in its new position might perhaps be projecting a little from the hedge and might cause an injury to some one passing by the same place after him. He was obliged to jump off his tram, hurry back to the park, find the place again, and put the branch back in its former position - although any one else but the patient would have seen that, on the contrary, it was bound to be more dangerous to passers-by in its original position than where he had put it in the hedge. The second and hostile act, which he carried out under compulsion, had clothed itself to his conscious view with the motives that really belonged to the first and philanthropic one.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2152  
 
   The conflict between love and hatred showed itself in our  patient by other signs as well. At the time of the 
revival of his piety he made up prayers for himself, which took up more and more time and eventually lasted 
for an hour and a half. The reason for this was that he found, like an inverted Balaam, that something always inserted itself into his pious phrases and turned them into their opposite. E.g., if he said, ‘May God protect him’, an evil spirit would hurriedly insinuate a ‘not’.¹ On one such occasion the idea occurred to him 
of cursing instead, for in that case, he thought, the contrary words would be sure to creep in. His original 
intention, which had been repressed by his praying, was forcing its way through in this last idea of his. In the end he found his way out of his embarrassment by giving up the prayers and replacing them by a short 
formula concocted out of the initial letters or syllables  of various prayers. He then recited this formula so 
quickly that nothing could slip into it. 
   He once brought me a dream which represented the same conflict in relation to his transference on to the 
physician. He dreamt that my mother was dead; he was anxious to offer me his condolences, but was 
afraid that in doing so he might break into an impertinent laugh , as he had repeatedly done on similar 
occasions in the past. He preferred, therefore, to leave a card on me with ‘p. c.’ written on it; but as he was writing them the letters turned into ‘p. f.’² 
 
   ¹ Compare the similar mechanism in the familiar case of sacrilegious thoughts entering the minds of devout persons. 
   ² [The customary abbreviations for ‘ pour condoler ’ and ‘ pour féliciter ’ respectively.] This dream provides the 
explanation of the compulsive laughter which so often occurs on mournful occasions and which is regarded as such an 
unaccountable phenomenon.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2153  
 
   The mutual antagonism between his feelings for his lady was too marked to have escaped his conscious 
perception entirely, although we may conclude from the obsessions in which it was manifested that he did 
not rightly appreciate the depth of his negative impulses. The lady had refused his first proposal, ten years 
earlier. Since then he had to his own knowledge passed through alternating periods, in which he either believed that he loved her intensely, or felt indifferent to her. Whenever in the course of the treatment he 
was faced by the necessity of taking some step which would bring him nearer the successful end of his 
courtship, his resistance usually began by taking the form of a conviction that after all he did not very much care for her - though this resistance, it is true, used soon to break down. Once when she was lying 
seriously ill in bed and he was most deeply concerned about her, there crossed his mind as he looked at 
her a wish that she might lie like that for ever. He explained this idea by an ingenious piece of sophistry: maintaining that he had only wished her to be permanently ill so that he might be relieved of his intolerable 
fear that she would have a repeated succession of attacks!¹ Now and then he used to occupy his 
imagination with day-dreams, which he himself recogni zed as ‘phantasies of revenge’ and felt ashamed of. 
Believing, for instance, that the lady set great store by the social standing of a suitor, he made up a phantasy in which she was married to a man of that kind, who was in some government office. He himself 
then entered the same department, and rose much more rapidly than her husband, who eventually became 
his subordinate. One day, his phantasy proceeded, this man committed some act of dishonesty. The lady threw herself at his feet and implored him to save her husband. He promised to do so, and informed her 
that it had only been for love of her that he had entered the service, because he had foreseen that such a 
moment would occur; and now that her husband was saved, his own mission was fulfilled and he would resign his post. 
   He produced other phantasies in which he did the lady some great service without her knowing that it was 
he who was doing it. In these he only recognized his affection, without sufficiently appreciating the origin 
and aim of his magnanimity, which was designed to repress his thirst for revenge, after the manner of Dumas’ Count of Monte-Cristo. Moreover he admitted that occasionally he was overcome by quite distinct 
impulses to do some mischief to the lady he admired. These impulses were mostly in abeyance when she 
was there, and only appeared in her absence.  
   ¹ It cannot be doubted that another contributory motive to this compulsive idea was a wish to know that she was 
powerless against his designs.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2154  
 
(F)  THE PRECIPITATING CAUSE OF THE ILLNESS  
 
   One day the patient mentioned quite casually an event which I could not fail to recognize as the 
precipitating cause of his illness, or at least as the immediate occasion of the attack which had begun some six years previously and had persisted to that day. He himself had no notion that he had brought forward anything of importance; he could not remember that he had ever attached any importance to the event; and 
moreover he had never forgotten it. Such an attitude on his part calls for some theoretical consideration. 
   In hysteria it is the rule that the precipitati ng causes of the illness are overtaken by amnesia no less than 
the infantile experiences by whose help the precipitati ng causes are able to transform their affective energy 
into symptoms. And where the amnesia cannot be comple te, it nevertheless subjects the recent traumatic 
precipitating cause to a process of erosion and robs it  at least of its most important components. In this 
amnesia we see the evidence of the repression which has  taken place. The case is different in obsessional 
neuroses. The infantile preconditions of the neurosis may be overtaken by amnesia, though this is often an 
incomplete one; but the immediate occasions of the illness are, on the contrary, retained in the memory. Repression makes use of another, and in reality a simpler, mechanism. The trauma, instead of being forgotten, is deprived of its affective cathexis; so that what remains in consciousness is nothing but its 
ideational content, which is perfectly colourless and is judged to be unimportant. The distinction between what occurs in hysteria and in an obsessional neurosis lies in the psychological processes which we can reconstruct behind the phenomena; the result  is almost always the same, for the colourless mnemic content 
is rarely reproduced and plays no part in the patient’s mental activity. In order to differentiate between the two kinds of repression we have on the surface nothing to rely upon but the patient’s assurance that he has 
a feeling in the one case of having always known the thing and in the other of having long ago forgotten it.¹ 
 
   ¹ It must therefore be admitted that in an obsessional neurosis there are two kinds of knowledge, and it is just as 
reasonable to hold that the patient ‘knows’ his traumas as that he does not ‘know’ them. For he knows them in that he 
has not forgotten them, and he does not know them in that he is unaware of their significance. It is often the same in 
ordinary life. The waiters who used to serve Schopenhauer at his regular restaurant ‘knew’ him in a certain sense, at a time when, apart from that, he was not known either in Frankfurt or outside it; but they did not ‘know’ him in the sense in which we speak to-day of ‘knowing’ Schopenhauer.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2155  
 
   For this reason it not uncommonly happens that obsessional neurotics, who are troubled with self-
reproaches but have connected their affects with t he wrong causes, will also tell the physician the true 
causes, without any suspicion that their self-r eproaches have simply become detached from them. In 
relating such an incident they will sometimes add with astonishment or even with an air of pride: ‘But I think 
nothing of that.’ This happened in the first case of obsessional neurosis which gave me an insight many 
years ago into the nature of the malady. The patient, who was a government official, was troubled by 
innumerable scruples. He was the man whose compulsive act in connection with the branch in the park at Schönbrunn I have already described. I was struck by the fact that the florin notes with which he paid his 
consultation fees were invariably clean and smooth. (This was before we had a silver coinage in Austria.) I 
once remarked to him that one could always tell a government official by the brand-new florins that he drew from the State treasury, and he then informed me that his florins were by no means new, but that he had 
them ironed out at home. It was a matter of conscience with him, he explained, not to hand any one dirty 
paper florins; for they harboured all sorts of dangerous bacteria and might do some harm to the recipient. At that time I already had a vague suspicion of the connection between neuroses and sexual life, so on another occasion I ventured to ask the patient how he stood in regard to that matter. ‘Oh, that’s quite all 
right,’ he answered airily, ‘I’m not at all badly off in that respect. I play the part of a dear old uncle in a 
number of respectable families, and now and then I make use of my position to invite some young girl to go out with me for a day’s excursion in the country. Then I arrange that we shall miss the train home and be 
obliged to spend the night out of town. I always engage two rooms - I do things most handsomely; but when 
the girl has gone to bed I go in to her and masturbate her with my fingers.’ - ‘But aren’t you afraid of doing her some harm, fiddling about in her genitals with your dirty hand?’ - At this he flared up: ‘Harm? Why, what 
harm should it do her? It hasn’t done a single one of them any harm yet, and they’ve all of them enjoyed it. 
Some of them are married now, and it hasn’t done them any harm at all.’ - He took my remonstrance in very bad part, and never appeared again. But I could only account for the contrast between his fastidiousness with the paper florins and his unscrupulousness in abusing the girls entrusted to him by supposing that the 
self-reproachful affect had become displaced. The aim of this displacement was obvious enough: if his self-
reproaches had been allowed to remain where they belonged he would have had to abandon a form of 
sexual gratification to which he was probably impelled by some powerful infantile determinants. The 
displacement therefore ensured his deriving a considerable advantage from his illness. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2156  
 
   But I must now return to a more detailed examinat ion of the precipitating cause of our present patient’s 
illness. His mother was brought up in a wealthy family with which she was distantly connected. This family 
carried on a large industrial concern. His father, at the time of his marriage, had been taken into the business, and had thus by his marriage made himself a fairly comfortable position. The patient had learnt from some chaff exchanged between his parents (whose marriage was an extremely happy one) that his 
father, some time before making his mother’s acquaintance, had made advances to a pretty but penniless 
girl of humble birth. So much by way of introduction. After his father’s death the patient’s mother told him one day that she had been discussing his future with her rich relations, and that one of her cousins had 
declared himself ready to let him marry one of his daughters when his education was completed; a 
business connection with the firm would offer him a brilliant opening in his profession. This family plan stirred up in him a conflict as to whether he should remain faithful to the lady he loved in spite of her 
poverty, or whether he should follow in his father’s footsteps and marry the lovely, rich, and well-connected 
girl who had been assigned to him. And he resolved this conflict, which was in fact one between his love and the persisting influence of his father’s wishes, by falling ill; or, to put it more correctly, by falling ill he avoided the task of resolving it in real life.¹ 
 
   ¹ It is worth emphasizing that his flight into illness was made possible by his identifying himself with his father. The 
identification enabled his affects to regress on to the residue of his childhood. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2157  
 
   The proof that this view was correct lies in the fact that the chief result of his illness was an obstinate 
incapacity for work, which allowed him to postpone the completion of his education for years. But the 
results of such an illness are never unintentional; what appears to be the consequence  of the illness is in 
reality the cause  or motive  of falling ill. 
   As was to be expected, the patient did not, to begin with, accept my elucidation of the matter. He could 
not imagine, he said, that the plan of marriage could have had any such effects : it had not made the slightest impression on him at the time. But in the further course of treatment he was forcibly brought to believe in the truth of my suspicion, and in a most singular manner. With the help of a transference 
phantasy, he experienced, as though it were new and belonged to the present, the very episode from the 
past which he had forgotten, or which had only passed though his mind unconsciously. There came an obscure and difficult period in the treatment; eventually it turned out that he had once met a young girl on 
the stairs in my house and had on the spot promot ed her into being my daughter. She had pleased him, 
and he pictured to himself that the only reason I was so kind and incredibly patient with him was that I 
wanted to have him for a son-in-law. At the same time he raised the wealth and position of my family to a level which agreed with the model he had in mind. But his undying love for his lady fought against the 
temptation. After we had gone though a series of the severest resistances and bitterest vituperations on his 
part, he could no longer remain blind to the overwhelming effect of the perfect analogy between the transference phantasy and the actual state of affairs in the past. I will repeat one of the dreams which he 
had at this period, so as to give an example of his manner of treating the subject. He dreamt that he saw 
my daughter in front of him; she had two patches of dung instead of eyes . No one who understands the 
language of dreams will find much difficulty in translating this one: it declared that he was marrying my 
daughter not for her ‘beaux yeux ’ but for her money . 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2158  
 
(G)  THE FATHER COMPLEX AND THE SOLUTION OF THE RAT IDEA  
 
   From the precipitating cause of the patient’s illness in his adult years there was a thread leading back to 
his childhood. He had found himself in a situation similar to that in which, as he knew or suspected, his father had been before his marriage; and he had thus been able to identify himself with his father. But his 
dead father was involved in his recent attack in yet another way. The conflict at the root of his illness was in 
essentials a struggle between the persisting influence of his father’s wishes and his own amatory 
predilections. If we take into consideration what the patient reported in the course of the first hours of his treatment, we shall not be able to avoid a suspicion that this struggle was a very ancient one and had 
arisen as far back as in his childhood. 
   By all accounts our patient’s father was a most excellent may. Before his marriage he had been a non-commissioned officer, and, as relics of that period of his life, he had retained a straightforward soldierly 
manner and a penchant  for using downright language. Apart from those virtues which are celebrated upon 
every tombstone, he was distinguished by a hearty sense of humour and a kindly tolerance towards his 
fellow-men. That he could be hasty and violent was certai nly not inconsistent with his other qualities, but 
was rather a necessary complement to them; but it occasionally brought down the most severe castigations 
upon the children, while they were young and naughty. When they grew up, however, he differed from other 
fathers in not attempting to exalt himself into a sacrosanct authority, but in sharing with them a knowledge of the little failures and misfortunes of his life with good-natured candour. His son was certainly not 
exaggerating when he declared that they had lived toget her like the best of friends, except upon a single 
point ( p. 2145
). And it must no doubt have been in connection with that very point that thoughts about his 
father’s death had occupied his mind when he was a small boy with unusual and undue intensity ( p. 2133 ), 
and that those thoughts made their appearance in the wo rding of the obsessional ideas of his childhood; 
and it can only have been in that same connection that he was able to wish for his father’s death, in order 
that a certain little girl’s sympathy might be aroused and that she might behave more kindly towards him (p. 2144
). 
   There can be no question that there was somethi ng in the sphere of sexuality that stood between the 
father and son, and that the father had come into some sort of opposition to the son’s prematurely developed erotic life. Several years after his father’s  death, the first time he experienced the pleasurable 
sensations of copulation, an idea sprang into his mind: ‘This is glorious! One might murder one’s father for this!’ This was at once an echo and an elucidation of the obsessional ideas of his childhood. Moreover, his father, shortly before his death, had directly opposed w hat later became our patient’s dominating passion. 
He had noticed that his son was always in the lady’s company, and had advised him to keep away from her, saying that it was imprudent of him and that he would only make a fool of himself.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2159  
 
   To this unimpeachable body of evidence we shall be able to add fresh material, if we turn to the history of 
the masturbatory side of our patient’s sexual activities. There is a conflict between the opinions of doctors 
and patients on this subject which has not hitherto  been properly appreciated. The patients are unanimous 
in their belief that masturbation, by which they mean masturbation during puberty , is the root and origin of 
all their troubles. The doctors are, upon the whole, unable to decide what line to take; but, influenced by the 
knowledge that not only neurotics but most normal people pass through a period of masturbation during 
their puberty, the majority of them are inclined to dismiss the patients’ assertions as gross exaggerations. In my opinion the patients are once again nearer to a correct view than the doctors; for the patients have 
some glimmering notion of the truth, while the doctors are in danger of overlooking an essential point. The 
thesis propounded by the patients certainly does not correspond to the facts in the sense in which they themselves construe it, namely, that masturbation during puberty (which may almost be described as a 
typical occurrence) is responsible for all neurotic disturbances. Their thesis requires interpretation. The 
masturbation of puberty is in fact no more than a revival of the masturbation of infancy, a subject which has hitherto invariably been neglected. Infantile masturbati on reaches a kind of climax, as a rule, between the 
ages of three and four or five; and it is the clearest expression of a child’s sexual constitution, in which the 
aetiology of subsequent neuroses must be sought. In this  disguised way, therefore, the patients are putting 
the blame for their illnesses upon their infantile sexuality; and they are perfectly right in doing so. On the 
other hand, the problem of masturbation becomes insoluble if we attempt to treat it as a clinical unit, and 
forget that it can represent the discharge of every variety of sexual component and of every sort of 
phantasy to which such components can give rise. The injurious effects of masturbation are only in a very small degree autonomous - that is to say, determined by its own nature. They are in substance merely part 
and parcel of the pathogenic significance of the subject’s sexual life as a whole. The fact that so many people can tolerate masturbation - that is, a certain amount  of it - without injury merely shows that their 
sexual constitution and the course of development of their sexual life have been such as to allow them to exercise the sexual function within the limits of what is culturally permissible; whereas other people, 
because their sexual constitution has been less favourable or their development has been disturbed, fall ill 
as a result of their sexuality - they cannot, that is, achieve the necessary suppression or sublimation of their 
sexual components without having recourse to inhibitions or substitutes.¹ 
 
   ¹ See Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality , 1905 d. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2160  
 
   Our present patient’s behaviour in the matter of mast urbation was most remarkable. He did not practise it 
during puberty and therefore, according to one set of views, he might have expected to be exempt from 
neurosis. On the other hand, an impulsion towards masturbatory activities came over him in his twenty-first year, shortly after his father’s death . He felt very much ashamed of himself each time he gave way to this 
kind of gratification, and soon foreswore the habit. From that time onwards it reappeared only upon rare 
and extraordinary occasions. It was provoked, he told me, when he experienced especially fine moments, 
or when he read especially fine passages. It occurred once, for instance, on a lovely summer’s afternoon when, in the middle of Vienna, he heard a postilion blowing his horn in the most wonderful way - until a 
policeman stopped him, because blowing horns is not allow ed in the centre of the town. And another time it 
happened when he read in Dichtung und Warheit  how the young Goethe had freed himself in a burst of 
tenderness from the effects of a curse which a jealous mistress had pronounced upon the next woman who should kiss his lips after her; he had long, almost superstitiously, suffered the curse to hold him back, but 
now he broke his bonds and kissed his love joyfully again and again.    It seemed to the patient not a little strange that he should be impelled to masturbate precisely upon such beautiful and uplifting occasions as these. But I could not help pointing out that these two occasions had 
something in common - a prohibition, and the defiance of a command. 
   We must also consider in the same connection his curious behaviour at a time when he was working for an examination and toying with his favourite phantasy that his father was still alive and might at any 
moment reappear. He used to arrange that his working hours should be as late as possible in the night. 
Between twelve and one o’clock at night he would interrupt his work, and open the front door of the flat as though his father were standing outside it; then, coming back into the hall, he would take out his penis and 
look at it in the looking-glass. This crazy conduct becomes intelligible if we suppose that he was acting as 
though he expected a visit from his father at the hour when ghosts are abroad. He had on the whole been 
idle at his work during his father’s lifetime, and this had often been a cause of annoyance to his father. And now that he was returning as a ghost, he was to be delighted at finding his son hard at work. But it was 
impossible that his father should be delighted at the other part of his behaviour; in this therefore he must be 
defying him. Thus, in a single unintelligible obsessional act, he gave expression to the two sides of his relation with his father, just as he did subsequently with regard to his lady by means of his obsessional act 
with the stone. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2161  
 
   Starting from these indications and from other data of a similar kind, I ventured to put forward a 
construction to the effect that when he was a child of under six he had been guilty of some sexual 
misdemeanour connected with masturbation and had been soundly castigated for it by his father. This punishment, according to my hypothesis, had, it was true, put an end to his masturbating, but on the other hand it had left behind it an ineradicable grudge against his father and had established him for all time in his 
role of an interferer with the patient’s sexual enjoyment.¹ To my great astonishment the patient then 
informed me that his mother had repeatedly described to him an occurrence of this kind which dated from his earliest childhood and had evidently escaped being forgotten by her on account of its remarkable 
consequences. He himself, however, had no recollection of it whatever. The tale was as follows. When he 
was very small - it became possible to establish the date more exactly owing to its having coincided with the fatal illness of an elder sister - he had done something naughty, for which his father had given him a 
beating. The little boy had flown into a terrible rage and had hurled abuse at his father even while he was 
under his blows. But as he knew no bad language, he had called him all the names of common objects that he could think of, and had screamed: ‘You lamp! You towel! You plate!’ and so on. His father, shaken by such an outburst of elemental fury, had stopped beating him, and had declared: ‘The child will be either a 
great man or a great criminal!’² The patient believed that the scene made a permanent impression upon 
himself as well as upon his father. His father, he said, never beat him again; and he also attributed to this experience a part of the change which came over his own character. From that time forward he was a 
coward - out of fear of the violence of his own rage. His whole life long, moreover, he was terribly afraid of 
blows, and used to creep away and hide, filled with terror and indignation, when one of his brothers or sisters was beaten. 
 
   ¹ Compare my suspicions to a similar effect in one of the first sessions ( p. 2145 ). 
   ² These alternatives did not exhaust the possibilities. His father had overlooked the commonest outcome of such 
premature passions - a neurosis. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2162  
 
   The patient subsequently questioned his mother again. She confirmed the story, adding that at the time 
he had been between three and four years old and that he had been given the punishment because he had 
bitten some one. She could remember no further details, except for a very uncertain idea that the person the little boy had hurt might have been his nurse. In her account there was no suggestion of his misdeed having been of a sexual nature.¹ 
 
   ¹ In psycho-analyses we frequently come across occurrences of this kind, dating back to the earliest years of the 
patient’s childhood, in which his infantile sexual activity appears to reach its climax and often comes to a catastrophic 
end owing to some misfortune or punishment. Such occurrences are apt to appear in a shadowy way in dreams. Often they will become so clear that the analyst thinks he has a firm hold of them, and will nevertheless evade any final elucidation; and unless he proceeds with the greatest skill and caution he may be compelled to leave it undecided whether the scene in question actually took place or not. It will help to put us upon the right track in interpreting it, if we  
recognize that more than one version of the scene (each often differing greatly from the other) may be detected in the patient’s unconscious phantasies. If we do not wish to go astray in our judgement of their historical reality, we must above all bear in mind that people’s ‘childhood memories’ are only consolidated at a later period, usually at the age of puberty; and that this involves a complicated process of remodelling, analogous in every way to the process by which a nation constructs legends about its early history. It at once becomes evident that in his phantasies about his infancy the individual as he grows up endeavours to efface the recollection of his auto-erotic activities ; and this he does by exalting 
their memory-traces to the level of object-love, just as a real historian will view the past in the light of the present. This explains why these phantasies abound in seductions and assaults, where the facts will have been confined to auto-erotic activities and the caresses or punishments that stimulated them. Furthermore, it becomes clear that in constructing phantasies about his childhood the individual sexualizes his memories ; that is, he brings commonplace 
experiences into relation with his sexual activity, and extends his sexual interest to them - though in doing this he is probably following upon the traces of a really existing connection. No one who remembers my ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’  will need to be told that it is not my intention in these remarks to detract from the importance which I have hitherto attached to infantile sexuality by reducing it to nothing more than sexual interest at the age of puberty. I merely wish to give some technical advice that may help to clear up a class of phantasy which is calculated to falsify the picture of infantile sexual activity.    It is seldom that we are in the fortunate position of being able, as in the present instance, to establish the facts upon which these tales of the individual’s prehistoric past are based, by recourse to the unimpeachable testimony of a grown-up person. Even so, the statement made by our patient’s mother leaves the way open to various possibilities. That she did not proclaim the sexual character of the offence for which the child was punished may have been due to the activity of her own censorship; for with all parents it is precisely this sexual element in their children’s past that their own censorship is most anxious to eliminate. But it is just as possible that the child was reproved by his nurse or by his mother herself for some commonplace piece of naughtiness of a non-sexual nature, and that his reaction was so violent that he was castigated by his father. In phantasies of this kind nurses and servants are regularly replaced by the superior figure of the mother. A deeper interpretation of the patient’s dreams in relation to this episode revealed the clearest traces of the presence in his mind of an imaginative production of a positively epic character. In this his sexual 
desires for his mother and sister and his sister’s premature death were linked up with the young hero’s chastisement at 
his father’s hand. It was impossible to unravel this tissue of phantasy thread by thread; the therapeutic success of the treatment was precisely what stood in the way of this. The patient recovered, and his ordinary life began to assert its claims: there were many tasks before him, which he had already neglected far too long, and which were incompatible with a continuation of the treatment. I am not to be blamed, therefore, for this gap in the analysis. The scientific results of psycho-analysis are at present only a by-product of its therapeutic aims, and for that reason it is often just in those cases where treatment fails that most discoveries are made.    The content of the sexual life of infancy consists in auto-erotic activity on the part of the dominant sexual components, in traces of object-love, and in the formation of that complex which deserves to be called the nuclear complex of the 
neuroses. It is the complex which comprises the child’s earliest impulses, alike tender and hostile, towards its parents and brothers and sisters, after its curiosity has been awakened - usually by the arrival of a new baby brother or sister. The uniformity of the content of the sexual life of child ren, together with the unvarying character of the modifying 
tendencies which are later brought to bear upon it, will easily account for the constant sameness which as a rule characterizes the phantasies that are constructed around the period of childhood, irrespective of how greatly or how little real experiences have contributed towards them. It is entirely characteristic of the nuclear complex of infancy that the child’s father should be assigned the part of a sexual opponent and of an interferer with auto-erotic sexual activities; and real events are usually to a large extent responsible for bringing this about.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2163  
 
   A discussion of this childhood scene will be found in the footnote, and here I will only remark that its 
emergence shook the patient for the first time in his refusal to believe that at some prehistoric period in his 
childhood he had been seized with fury (which had subsequently become latent) against the father whom he loved so much. I must confess that I had expected it to have a greater effect, for the incident had been described to him so often - even by his father himself - that there could be no doubt of its objective reality. 
But, with that capacity for being illogical which never fails to bewilder one in such highly intelligent people 
as obsessional neurotics, he kept urging against the evidential value of the story the fact that he himself could not remember the scene. And so it was only along the painful road of transference that he was able 
to reach a conviction that his relation to his father really necessitated the postulation of this unconscious 
complement. Things soon reached a point at which, in his dreams, his waking phantasies, and his associations, he began heaping the grossest and filthiest abuse upon me and my family, though in his 
deliberate actions he never treated me with anything but the greatest respect. His demeanour as he 
repeated these insults to me was that of a man in des pair. ‘How can a gentleman like you, sir,’ he used to 
ask, ‘let yourself be abused in this way by a low, good-for-nothing fellow like me? You ought to turn me out: that’s all I deserve.’ While he talked like this, he would get up from the sofa and roam about the room, - a 
habit which he explained at first as being due to delicacy of feeling: he could not bring himself, he said, to 
utter such horrible things while he was lying there so comfortably. But soon he himself found a more cogent explanation, namely, that he was avoiding my proximit y for fear of my giving him a beating. If he stayed on 
the sofa he behaved like some one in desperate terror trying to save himself from castigations of terrific violence; he would bury his head in his hands, cover his face with his arm, jump up suddenly and rush away, his features distorted with pain, and so on. He recalled that his father had had a passionate temper, 
and sometimes in his violence had not known where to stop. Thus, little by little, in this school of suffering, 
the patient won the sense of conviction which he had lacked - though to any disinterested mind the truth 
would have been almost self-evident.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2164  
 
   And now the path was clear to the solution of his rat idea. The treatment had reached its turning-point, 
and a quantity of material information which had hitherto been withheld became available, and so made 
possible a reconstruction of the whole concatenation of events.    In my description I shall, as I have already said, content myself with the briefest possible summary of the circumstances. Obviously the first problem to be solv ed was why the two speeches of the Czech captain - 
his rat story, and his request to the patient that he should pay back the money to Lieutenant A. - should have had such an agitating effect on him and should have provoked such violently pathological reactions. The presumption was that it was a question of ‘com plexive sensitiveness’, and that the speeches had jarred 
upon certain hyperaesthetic spots in his unconscious. And so it proved to be. As always happened with the patient in connection with military matters, he had been in a state of unconscious identification with his father, who had seen many years’ service and had been full of stories of his soldiering days. Now it 
happened by chance - for chance may play a part in the formation of a symptom, just as the wording may 
help in the making of a joke - that one of his father’s little adventures had an important element in common with the captain’s request. His father, in his capacity as non-commissioned officer, had control over a small sum of money and had on one occasion lost it at cards. (Thus he had been a ‘Spielratte ’.¹) He would have 
found himself in a serious position if one of his comrades had not advanced him the amount. After he had left the army and become well-off, he had tried to find this friend in need so as to pay him back the money, but had not managed to trace him. The patient was uncertain whether he had ever succeeded in returning 
the money. The recollection of this sin of his father’s youth was painful to him, for, in spite of appearances, 
his unconscious was filled with hostile strictures upon his father’s character. The captain’s words, ‘You must pay back the 3.80 kronen to Lieutenant A.’, had sounded to his ears like an allusion to this unpaid debt of 
his father’s. 
 
   ¹ [Literally, ‘play-rat’. Colloquial German for ‘gambler’.] 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2165  
 
   But the information that the young lady at the post office at Z-- had herself paid the charges due upon the 
packet, with a complimentary remark about himself,¹ had intensified his identification with his father in quite 
another direction. At this stage in the analysis he brought out some new information, to the effect that the landlord of the inn at the little place where the post office was had had a pretty daughter. She had been decidedly encouraging to the smart young officer, so that he had thought of returning there after the 
manoeuvres were over and of trying his luck with her. Now, however, she had a rival in the shape of the 
young lady at the post office. Like his father in the tale of his marriage, he could afford now to hesitate upon which of the two he should bestow his favours when he had finished his military service. We can see at 
once that his singular indecision whether he should travel to Vienna or go back to the place where the post 
office was, and the constant temptation he felt to turn back while he was on the journey ( p. 2140
), were not 
so senseless as they seemed to us at first. To his conscious mind, the attraction exercised upon him by Z--, 
the place where the post office was, was explained by the necessity of seeing Lieutenant A. and fulfilling 
the vow with his assistance. But in reality what was attracting him was the young lady at the post office, and the lieutenant was merely a good substitute   for her, since he had lived at the same place and had himself been in charge of the military postal service. And when subsequently he heard that it was not Lieutenant A. 
but another officer B., who had been on duty at the post office that day, he drew him into his combination as 
well; and he was then able to reproduce in his deliria in connection with the two officers the hesitation he 
felt between the two girls who were so kindly disposed towards him.² 
 
   ¹ It must not be forgotten that he had learnt this before  the captain, owing to a misapprehension, requested him to pay 
back the money to Lieutenant A. This circumstance was the vital point of the story, and by suppressing it the patient 
reduced himself to a state of the most hopeless muddle and for some time prevented me from getting any idea of the meaning of it all. 
   
² (Footnote added 1923:) My patient did his very best to throw confusion over the little episode of the repayment of 
the charges for his pince-nez, so that perhaps my own account of it may also have failed to clear it up entirely. I 
therefore reproduce here a little map (Fig. 5), by means of which Mr. and Mrs. Strachey have endeavoured to make the 
situation at the end of the manoeuvres plainer. My translators have justly observed that the patient’s behaviour remains unintelligible so long as a further circumstance is not expressly stated, namely, that Lieutenant A. had formerly lived at the place Z-- where the post office was situated and had been in charge of the military post office there, but that during the last few days he had handed over this billet to Lieutenant B. and had been transferred to another village. The ‘cruel’ captain had been in ignorance of this transfer, and this was the explanation of his mistake in supposing that the charges had to be paid back to Lieutenant A. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2166  
 
   In elucidating the effects produced by the captain’s rat story we must follow the course of the analysis 
more closely. The patient began by producing an enormous mass of associative material, which at first, 
however, threw no light upon the circumstances in whic h the formation of his obsession had taken place. 
The idea of the punishment carried out by means of rats had acted as a stimulus to a number of his instincts and had called up a whole quantity of recollections; so that, in the short interval between the 
captain’s story and his request to him to pay back the money, rats had acquired a series of symbolic 
meanings, to which, during the period which follow ed, fresh ones were continually being added. I must 
confess that I can only give a very incomplete account of the whole business. What the rat punishment 
stirred up more than anything else was his anal erotism , which had played an important part in his 
childhood and had been kept in activity for many years by a constant irritation due to worms. In this way 
rats came to have the meaning of ‘ money ’.¹ The patient gave an indication of this connection by reacting to 
the word ‘ Ratten’ [‘rats’] with the association ‘ Raten’ [‘instalments’]. In his obsessional deliria he had coined 
himself a regular rat currency. When, for instance, in reply to a question, I told him the amount of my fee for an hour’s treatment, he said to himself (as I learned six months later): ‘So many florins, so many rats’. Little by little he translated into this language the whole complex of money interests which centred round his 
father’s legacy to him, that is to say, all his ideas connected with that subject were, by way of the verbal 
bridge ‘ Raten - Ratten’, carried over into his obsessional life and brought under the dominion of his 
unconscious. Moreover, the captain’s request to him to pay back the charges due upon the packet served 
to strengthen the money significance of rats, by way of another verbal bridge ‘ Spielratte ’, which led back to 
his father’s gambling debt. 
 
   ¹ See my paper on ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908 b). 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2167  
 
   But the patient was also familiar with the fact that rats are carriers of dangerous infectious diseases; he 
could therefore employ them as symbols of his dread (justifiable enough in the army) of syphilitic infection . 
This dread concealed all sorts of doubts as to the kind of life his father had led during his term of military 
service. Again, in another sense, the penis  itself is a carrier of syphilitic infection; and in this way he could 
consider the rat as a male organ of sex. It had a further title to be so regarded; for a penis (especially a 
child’s penis) can easily be compared to a worm , and the captain’s story had been about rats burrowing in 
some one’s anus, just as the large round-worms had in his when he was a child. Thus the penis 
significance of rats was based, once more, upon anal erotism. And apart from this, the rat is a dirty animal, 
feeding upon excrement and living in sewers.¹ It is perhaps unnecessary to point out how great an 
extension of the rat delirium became possible owing to this new meaning. For instance, ‘So many rats, so many florins’ could serve as an excellent characterization of a certain female profession which he 
particularly detested. On the other hand, it is certainly not a matter of indifference that the substitution of a 
penis for a rat in the captain’s story resulted in a situation of intercourse per anum , which could not fail to be 
especially revolting to him when brought into connection with his father and the woman he loved. And when 
we consider that the same situation was reproduced in the compulsive threat which had formed in his mind 
after the captain had made his request, we shall be forcibly reminded of certain curses in use among the 
Southern Slavs.² Moreover, all of this material, and more besides, was woven into the fabric of the rat discussions behind the screen-association ‘ heiraten’ [‘to marrry’]. 
 
   ¹ If the reader feels tempted to shake his head at the possibility of such leaps of imagination in the neurotic mind, I 
may remind him that artists have sometimes indulged in similar freaks of fancy. Such, for instance, are Le Poitevin’s Diableries érotiques . 
   
² The exact terms of these curses will be found in the periodical Anthropophyteia, edited by F. S. Krauss. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2168  
 
   The story of the rat punishment, as was shown by the patient’s own account of the matter and by his 
facial expression as he repeated the story to me, had fanned into a flame all his prematurely suppressed 
impulses of cruelty, egoistic and sexual alike. Yet, in spite of all this wealth of material, no light was thrown upon the meaning of his obsessional idea until one day the Rat-Wife in Ibsen’s Little Eyolf  came up in the 
analysis, and it became impossible to escape the inference that in many of the shapes assumed by his 
obsessional deliria rats had another meaning still - namely, that of children.¹ Enquiry into the origin of this 
new meaning at once brought me up against some of the earliest and most important roots. Once when the patient was visiting his father’s grave he had seen a big beast, which he had taken to be a rat, gliding along 
over the grave.² He assumed that it had actually co me out of his father’s grave, and had just been having a 
meal off his corpse. The notion of a rat is inseparably bound up with the fact that it has sharp teeth with 
which it gnaws and bites.³ But rats cannot be sharp-toothed, greedy and dirty with impunity: they are cruelly 
persecuted and mercilessly put to death by man, as the patient had often observed with horror. He had 
often pitied the poor creatures. But he himself had been just such a nasty, dirty little wretch, who was apt to bite people when he was in a rage, and had been fearfully punished for doing so ( p. 2162
). He could truly 
be said to find ‘a living likeness of himself’ in the rat. It was almost as though Fate, when the captain told 
him his story, had been putting him through an association test: she had called out a ‘complex stimulus-
word’, and he had reacted to it with his obsessional idea.  
   ¹ Ibsen’s Rat-Wife must certainly be derived from the legendary Pied Piper of Hamelin, who first enticed away the rats 
into the water, and then, by the same means, lured the children out of the town, never to return. So too, Little Eyolf threw himself into the water under the spell of the Rat-Wife. In legends generally the rat appears not so much as a disgusting creature but as something uncanny - as a chthonic animal, one might almost say; and it is used to represent the souls of the dead. 
   
² It was no doubt a weasel, of which there are great numbers in the Zentralfriedhof [the principal cemetery] in Vienna. 
   ³ Compare the words of Mephistopheles: 
 
 Doch dieser Schwelle Zauber zu zerspalten  Bedarf ich eines Rattenzahns.  .     .    .     .     .     .     .     .  Noch einen Biss, so ist’s geschehn!   [But to break through the magic of this threshold  I need a rat’s tooth. ( He conjures up a rat .) 
 .     .    .     .     .     .     .     .  Another bite, and it is done!] 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2169  
 
   According, then, to his earliest and most momentous experiences, rats were children. And at this point he 
brought out a piece of information which he had kept  away from its context long enough, but which now 
fully explained the interest he was bound to feel in children. The lady, whose admirer he had been for so 
many years, but whom he had nevertheless not been able to make up his mind to marry, was condemned to childlessness by reason of a gynaecological operation which had involved the removal of both ovaries. 
This indeed - for he was extraordinarily fond of children - had been the chief reason for his hesitation. 
   It was only then that it became possible to understand the inexplicable process by which his obsessional idea had been formed. With the assistance of our knowledge of infantile sexual theories and of symbolism 
(as learnt from the interpretation of dreams) the whole thing could be translated and given a meaning. 
When, at the afternoon halt (during which he had lost hi s pince-nez), the captain had told him about the rat 
punishment, the patient had only been struck at first by the combined cruelty and lasciviousness of the 
situation depicted. But immediately afterwards a connection had been set up with the scene from his 
childhood in which he himself had bitten some one. The captain - a man who could defend such punishments - had become a substitute for his father, and had thus drawn down upon himself a part of the reviving animosity which had burst out, on the original occasion, against his cruel father. The idea which 
came into his consciousness for a moment, to the effect that something of the sort might happen to some 
one he was fond of, is probably to be translated into a wish such as ‘You ought to have the same thing done to you!’ aimed at the teller of the story, but through him at his father. A day and a half later,¹ when the 
captain had handed him the packet upon which the charges were due and had requested him to pay back 
the 3.80 kronen  to Lieutenant A., he had already been aware that his ‘cruel superior’ was making a mistake, 
and that the only person he owed anything to was the young lady at the post office. It might easily, 
therefore, have occurred to him to think of some derisive reply, such as, ‘Will I, though?’ or ‘Pay your 
grandmother!’ or ‘Yes! You bet I’II pay him back the money!’ - answers which would have been subject to no compulsive force. But instead, out of the stirrings of his father-complex and out of his memory of the scene from his childhood, there formed in his mind some such answer as: ‘Yes! I’II pay back the money to 
A. when my father and the lady have children!’ or ‘As sure as my father and the lady can have children, I’ll 
pay him back the money!’ In short, a derisive affirmation attached to an absurd condition which could never be fulfilled.² 
 
   ¹ Not that evening, as he first told me. It was quite impossible that the pince-nez he had ordered could have arrived 
the same day. The patient shortened the interval of time retrospectively, because it was the period during which the 
decisive mental connections had been set up, and during which the repressed episode had taken place - the episode of his interview with the officer who told him of the friendly conduct of the young lady at the post office. 
   
² Thus absurdity signifies derision in the language of obsessional thought, just as it does in dreams. See my 
Interpretation of Dreams . 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2170  
 
   But now the crime had been committed; he had insulted the two persons who were dearest to him - his 
father and his lady. The deed had called for punishment, and the penalty had consisted in his binding 
himself by a vow which it was impossible for him to fulfil and which entailed literal obedience to his superior’s ill-founded request. The vow ran as follows: ‘ Now you must really pay back the money to A. ’ In 
his convulsive obedience he had repressed his better knowledge that the captain’s request had been based 
upon erroneous premises: ‘Yes, you must pay back the money to A., as your father’s surrogate has 
required. Your father cannot be mistaken.’ So too the king cannot be mistaken; if he addresses one of his 
subjects by a title which is not his, the subject bears that title ever afterwards. 
   Only vague intelligence of these events reached the patient’s consciousness. But his revolt against the 
captain’s order and the sudden transformation of that revolt into its opposite were both represented there. 
First had come the idea that he was not  to pay back the money, or it (that is, the rat punishment) would 
happen; and then had come the transformation of this idea into a vow to the opposite effect, as a punishment for his revolt.    Let us, further, picture to ourselves the general c onditions under which the formation of the patient’s great 
obsessional idea occurred. His libido had been increased by a long period of abstinence coupled with the 
friendly welcome which a young officer can always reckon upon receiving when he goes among women. 
Moreover, at the time when he had started for t he manoeuvres, there had been a certain coolness between 
himself and his lady. This intensification of his libido had inclined him to a renewal of his ancient struggle 
against his father’s authority, and he had dared to think of having sexual intercourse with other women. His 
loyalty to his father’s memory had grown weaker, his doubts as to his lady’s merits had increased; and in that frame of mind he let himself be dragged into insulting the two of them, and had then punished himself 
for it. In doing so he had copied an old model. And when at the end of the manoeuvres he had hesitated so 
long whether he should travel to Vienna or whether he should stop and fulfil his vow, he had represented in a single picture the two conflicts by which he had from the very first been torn - whether or no he should remain obedient to his father and whether or no he should remain faithful to his beloved.¹ 
 
   ¹ It is perhaps not uninteresting to observe that once again obedience to his father coincided with abandoning the 
lady. If he had stopped and paid back the money to A., he would have made atonement to his father, and at the same 
time he would have deserted his lady in favour of some one else more attractive. In this conflict the lady had been victorious - with the assistance, to be sure, of the patient’s own normal good sense. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2171  
 
   I may add a word upon the interpretation of the ‘sanction’ which, it will be remembered, was to the effect 
that ‘otherwise the rat punishment will be carried out on both of them’. It was based upon the influence of 
two infantile sexual theories, which I have discussed elsewhere.¹ The first of these theories is that babies come out of the anus; and the second, which follows l ogically from the first, is that men can have babies 
just as well as women. According to the technical rules for interpreting dreams, the notion of coming out of  
the rectum can be represented by the opposite notion of creeping into the rectum (as in the rat 
punishment), and vice versa . 
 
   We should not be justified in expecting such severe obsessional ideas as were present in this case to be 
cleared up in any simpler manner or by any other means. When we reached the solution that has been described above, the patient’s rat delirium disappeared. 
 
   ¹ ‘On the Sexual Theories of Children’ (1908 c). 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2172  
 
II 
 
THEORETICAL 
 
(A)  SOME GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OBSESSIONAL STRUCTURES ¹ 
 
In the year 1896 I defined obsessional ideas as ‘tr ansformed self-reproaches which have re-emerged from 
repression and which always relate to some sexual act that was performed with pleasure in childhood’. This 
definition now seems to me to be open to criticism upon formal grounds, though its component elements 
are unobjectionable. It was aiming too much at unification, and took as its model the practice of obsessional neurotics themselves, when, with their characterist ic liking for indeterminateness, they heap together under 
the name of ‘obsessional ideas’ the most heterogeneous psych ical structures.² In point of fact, it would be 
more correct to speak of ‘obsessive thinking’, and to make it clear that obsessional structures can correspond to every sort of psychical act. They can be classed as wishes, temptations, impulses, reflections, doubts, commands, or prohibitions. Patients endeavour in general to tone down such 
distinctions and to regard what remains of these psychical acts after they have been deprived of their 
affective index simply as ‘obsessional ideas’. Our pr esent patient gave an example of this type of behaviour 
in one of his first sessions, when he attempted to reduce a wish to the level of a mere ‘train of thought’ 
(p. 2144
). 
 
   ¹ Several of the points dealt with in this and the following section have already been mentioned in the literature on the 
subject of obsessional neuroses, as may be gathered from Löwenfeld’s exhaustive study, Die psychischen 
Zwangserscheinungen , 1904, which is the standard work upon this form of disease. 
   ² This fault in my definition is to some extent corrected in the paper itself. The following passage will be found: ‘The 
re-activated memories, however, and the self-reproaches formed from them never re-emerge into consciousness 
unchanged: what become conscious as obsessional ideas and affects, and take the place of the pathogenic memories so far as conscious life is concerned, are structures in the nature of a compromise between the repressed ideas and the repressing ones.’ In the definition, that is to say, especial stress is to be laid on the word ‘transformed’.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2173  
 
   It must be confessed, moreover, that even the phenomenology of obsessional thinking has not yet had 
sufficient attention paid to it. During the secondary defensive struggle, which the patient carries on against 
the ‘obsessional ideas’ that have forced their way into his consciousness, psychical structures make their appearance which deserve to be given a special name.  (Such, for example, were the sequences of 
thoughts that occupied our patient’s mind on his journey back from the manoeuvres.) They are not purely 
reasonable considerations arising in opposition to the obsessional thoughts, but, as it were, hybrids 
between the two species of thinking; they accept ce rtain of the premises of the obsession they are 
combating, and thus, while using the weapons of reason, are established upon a basis of pathological thought. I think such structures as these deserve to be given the name of ‘ deliria’. To make the distinction 
clear, I will give an instance, which should be inserted into its proper context in the patient’s case history. I 
have already described the crazy conduct to which he gave way at one time when he was preparing for an 
examination - how, after working till far into the night, he used to go and open the front door to his father’s 
ghost, and then look at his genitals in the looking-glass ( p. 2160
). He tried to bring himself to his senses by 
asking himself what his father would say to it all if he were really still alive. But the argument had no effect so long as it was put forward in this rational shape. The spectre was not laid until he had transformed the 
same idea into a ‘delirious’ threat to the effect that if he ever went through this nonsense again some evil 
would befall his father in the next world.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2174  
 
   The distinction between a primary and a secondar y defensive struggle is no doubt well founded, but we 
find its value unexpectedly diminished when we discover that the patients themselves do not know the 
wording of their own obsessional ideas . This may sound paradoxical, but it is perfectly good sense. During 
the progress of a psycho-analysis it is not only the patient who plucks up courage, but his disease as well; it grows bold enough to speak more plainly than before.  To drop the metaphor, what happens is that the 
patient, who his hitherto turned his eyes away in terror from his own pathological productions, begins to attend to them and obtains a clearer and more detailed view of them.¹    There are, besides this, two special ways in which a more precise knowledge of obsessional structures 
can be gained. In the first place, experience shows that an obsessional command (or whatever it may be), 
which in waking life is known only in a truncated and distorted form, like a mutilated telegraph message, may have its actual text brought to light in a dream. Such texts appear in dreams in the shape of speeches, 
and are thus an exception to the rule that speeches in dreams are derived from speeches in real life.² 
Secondly, in the course of the analytic examination of a case history, one becomes convinced that if a 
number of obsessions succeed one another they are oft en - even though their wording is not identical - 
ultimately one and the same. The obsession may have been successfully shaken off on its first 
appearance, but it comes back a second time in a distorted form and without being recognized, and may 
then perhaps be able to hold its own in the defensive st ruggle more effectively, precisely because of its 
distortion. But the original form is the correct one, and often displays its meaning quite openly. When we 
have at great pains elucidated an unintelligible obsessi onal idea, it often happens that the patient informs 
us that just such a notion, wish, or temptation as the one we have constructed did in fact make its 
appearance on one occasion before the obsessional idea had arisen, but that it did not persist. It would 
unfortunately involve us in too lengthy a digression if we were to give instances of this from the history of 
our present patient.  
   ¹ Some patients carry the diversion of their attention to such lengths that they are totally unable to give the content of 
an obsessional idea or to describe an obsessional act though they have performed it over and over again. 
   ² See The Interpretation of Dreams , 1900 a, Chapter VI, Section F. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2175  
 
   What is officially described as an ‘obsessional idea’ exhibits, therefore, in its distortion from its original 
wording, traces of the primary defensive struggle. Its distortion enables it to persist, since conscious 
thought is thus compelled to misapprehend it, just as though it were a dream; for dreams also are a product of compromise and distortion, and are also misapprehended by waking thought.    This misapprehension on the part of consciousness can be seen at work not only in reference to the 
obsessional ideas themselves, but also in reference to the products of the secondary defensive struggle, 
such, for instance, as the protective formulas. I can produce two good examples of this. Our patient used to employ as a defensive formula a rapidly pronounced ‘ aber’ [‘but’] accompanied by a gesture of repudiation. 
He told me on one occasion that this formula had become altered recently; he now no longer said ‘áber ’ but 
‘abér ’. When he was asked to give the reason for this new departure, he declared that the mute ‘ e’ of the 
second syllable gave him no sense of security against the intrusion, which he so much dreaded, of some 
foreign and contradictory element, and that he had therefore decided to accent the ‘ e’. This explanation (an 
excellent sample of the obsessional neurotic style) was, however, clearly inadequate; the most that it could 
claim to be was a rationalization. The truth was that ‘ abér’  was an approximation towards the similar-
sounding ‘ abwehr ’ [’defence’], a term which he had learnt in the course of our theoretical discussions of 
psycho-analysis. He had thus put the treatment to an illegitimate and ‘delirious’ use in order to strengthen a defensive formula. Another time he told me about his principal magic word, which was an apotropaic against every evil; he had put it together out of the init ial letters of the most powerfully beneficent of his 
prayers and had clapped on an ‘amen’ at the end of it. I cannot reproduce the word itself, for reasons which will become apparent immediately. For, when he told it me, I could not help noticing that the word was in fact an anagram of the name of his lady. Her name contained an ‘s’, and this he had put last, that is, 
immediately before the ‘amen’ at the end. We may say, therefore, that by this process he had brought his ‘Samen’ [‘semen’] into contact with the woman he loved; in imagination, that is to say, he had masturbated with her. He himself, however, had never noticed this  very obvious connection; his defensive forces had 
allowed themselves to be fooled by the repressed ones. Th is is also a good example of the rule that in time 
the thing which is meant to be warded off invariably finds its way into the very means which is being used for warding it off.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2176  
 
   I have already asserted that obsessional thoughts have undergone a distortion similar to that undergone 
by dream-thoughts before they become the manifest content of a dream. The technique of this distortion 
may therefore be of interest to us, and there should be nothing to prevent our exhibiting its various modes by means of a series of obsessions which have been translated and made clear. But here again the conditions governing the publication of this case make it impossible for me to give more than a few 
specimens. Not all of the patient’s obsessions were so complicated in their structure and so difficult to solve 
as the great rat idea. In some of the others a very simple technique was employed - namely, that of distortion by omission or ellipsis. This technique is pre-eminently applicable to jokes, but in our present 
case, too, it did useful work as a means of protecting things from being understood. 
   For instance, one of the patient’s oldest and favourite obsessions (which corresponded to an admonition or warning) ran as follows: ‘ If I marry the lady, some misfortune will befall my father  (in the next world).’ If 
we insert the intermediate steps, which had been skipped but were known to us from the analysis, we get the following train of thought: ‘If my father were alive, he would be as furious over my design of marrying the lady as he was in the scene in my childhood; so that I should fly into a rage with him once more and wish him every possible evil; and thanks to the omni potence of my wishes¹ these evils would be bound to 
come upon him.’    Here is another instance in which a solution can be reached by filling out an ellipsis. It is once more in the nature of a warning or an ascetic prohibition. The patient had a charming little niece of whom he was very 
fond. One day this idea came into his head: ‘ If you indulge in intercourse, something will happen to Ella ’ 
(i.e. she will die). When the omissions have been made good, we have: ‘Every time you copulate, even with 
a stranger, you will not be able to avoid the reflection that in your married life sexual intercourse can never 
bring you a child (on account of the lady’s sterility). This will grieve you so much that you will become 
envious of your sister on account of little Ella, and you will grudge her the child. These envious impulses will inevitably lead to the child’s death.’²  
   ¹ This omnipotence is discussed further on. 
   ² An example from another of my works, Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious , will recall to the reader the 
manner in which this elliptical technique is employed in making jokes: ‘There is a witty and pugnacious journalist in Vienna, whose biting invective has repeatedly led to his being physically maltreated by the subjects of his attacks. On one occasion, when a fresh misdeed on the part of one of his habitual opponents was being discussed, somebody exclaimed: "If X hears of this, he’ll get his ears boxed again." . . . The apparent absurdity of this remark disappears if between the two clauses we insert the words: "he’ll write such a scathing article upon the man, that, etc."' - This elliptical joke, we may note, is similar in its content, as well as in its form, to the first example quoted in the text.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2177  
 
   The technique of distortion by ellipsis seems to be typical of obsessional neuroses; I have come across it 
in the obsessional thoughts of other patients as well. One example, a particularly transparent one, is of 
especial interest on account of a certain structural similarity with the rat idea. It was a case of doubting, and 
occurred in a lady who suffers principally from obsessional acts. This lady was going for a walk with her 
husband in Nuremberg, and made him take her into a shop, where she purchased various objects for her 
child and amongst them a comb. Her husband, finding that the shopping was too long a business for his 
taste, said that he had noticed some coins in an antique shop on the way which he was anxious to secure, adding that after he had made his purchase he would come and fetch her in the shop in which they at 
present were. But he stayed away, as she thought, far too long. When he came back she accordingly asked 
him where he had been. ‘Why,’ he replied, ‘at the antique shop I told you about.’ At the same instant she was seized by a tormenting doubt whether she had not as a matter of fact always possessed the comb 
which she had just bought for her child. She was naturally quite unable to discover the simple mental link 
that was involved. There is nothing for it but to  regard the doubt as having become displaced, and to 
reconstruct the complete chain of unconscious thoughts as  follows: ‘If it is true that you were only at the 
antique shop, if I am really to believe that, then I may just as well believe that this comb that I bought a 
moment ago has been in my possession for years.’ Here, therefore, the lady was drawing a derisive and 
ironical parallel, just as when our patient thought: ‘Oh yes, as sure as those two’ (his father and the lady) ‘will have children, I shall pay back the money to A.’ In the lady’s case the doubt was dependent upon her 
unconscious jealousy, which led her to suppose that her husband had spent the interval of his absence in 
paying a visit of gallantry. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2178  
 
   I shall not in the present paper attempt any discussion of the psychological  significance of obsessional 
thinking. Such a discussion would be of extraordinary value in its results, and would do more to clarify our 
ideas upon the nature of the conscious and the uncon scious than any study of hysteria or the phenomena 
of hypnosis. It would be a most desirable thing if the philosophers and psychologists who develop brilliant theoretical views on the unconscious upon a basis of hearsay knowledge or from their own conventional 
definitions would first submit to the convincing im pressions which may be gained from a first-hand study of 
the phenomena of obsessional thinking. We might almost go to the length of requiring it of them, if the task 
were not so far more laborious than the methods of work to which they are accustomed. I will only add here 
that in obsessional neuroses the unconscious mental processes occasionally break through into 
consciousness in their pure and undistorted form, that such incursions may take place at every possible stage of the unconscious process of thought, and that at the moment of the incursion the obsessional ideas 
can, for the most part, be recognized as formations of very long standing. This accounts for the striking circumstance that, when the analyst tries, with the patient ’s help, to discover the date of the first occurrence 
of an obsessional idea, the patient is obliged to place it further and further back as the analysis proceeds, and is constantly finding fresh ‘first’ o ccasions for the appearance of the obsession. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2179  
 
(B)  SOME PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS:  
THEIR ATTITUDE TOWARD REALITY, SUPERSTITION AND DEATH  
 
   In this section I intend to deal with a few mental characteristics of obsessional neurotics which, though 
they do not seem important in themselves, nevertheless lie upon the road to a comprehension of more important things. They were strongly marked in our pres ent patient; but I know that they are not attributable 
to his individual character, but to his disorder, and that they are to be met with quite typically in other 
obsessional patients. 
    Our patient was to a high degree superstitious, and this although he was a highly educated and 
enlightened man of considerable acumen, and although he was able at times to assure me that he did not 
believe a word of all this rubbish. Thus he was at once superstitious and not superstitious; and there was a clear distinction between his attitude and the superst ition of uneducated people who feel themselves at one 
with their belief. He seemed to understand that his superstition was dependent upon his obsessional thinking, although at times he gave way to it completely. The meaning of this inconsistent and vacillating behaviour can be most easily, grasped if it is regarded in the light of a hypothesis which I shall now proceed to mention. I did not hesitate to assume that t he truth was not that the patient still had an open mind upon 
this subject, but that he had two separate and contr adictory convictions upon it. His oscillation between 
these two views quite obviously depended upon his momentary attitude towards his obsessional disorder. As soon as he had got the better of one of these obsessions, he used to smile in a superior way at his own 
credulity, and no events then occurred that were calculated to shake his firmness; but the moment he came 
under the sway of another obsession which had not been cleared up - or, what amounts to the same thing, of a resistance - the strangest coincidences would happen, to support him in his credulous belief. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2180  
 
   His superstition was nevertheless that of an educated man, and he avoided such vulgar prejudices as 
being afraid of Friday or of the number thirteen, and so on. But he believed in premonitions and in prophetic 
dreams; he would constantly meet the very person of whom, for some inexplicable reason, he had just been thinking; or he would receive a letter from some one who had suddenly come into his mind after being forgotten for many years. At the same time he was honest enough - or rather, he was loyal enough to his 
official conviction - not to have forgotten instances in which he strangest forebodings had come to nothing. 
On one occasion, for instance, when he went away for his summer holidays, he had felt morally certain that he would never return to Vienna alive. He also admitted that the great majority of his premonitions related 
to things which had no special personal importance to him, and that, when he met an acquaintance of 
whom, until a few moments previously, he had not thought for a very long time, nothing further took place between himself and the miraculous apparition. And he naturally could not deny that all the important 
events of his life had occurred without his having had any premonition of them, and that, for instance, his father’s death had taken him entirely by surprise. But arguments such as these had no effect upon the discrepancy in his convictions. They merely served to prove the obsessional nature of his superstitions, and that could already be inferred from the way in which they came and went with the increase and decrease of 
his resistance. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2181  
 
   I was not in a position, of course, to give a rational explanation of all the miraculous stories of his remoter 
past. But as regards the similar things that happened during the time of his treatment, I was able to prove to 
him that he himself invariably had a hand in the manufacture of these miracles, and I was able to point out to him the methods that he employed. He worked by  means of peripheral vision and reading, forgetting, 
and, above all, errors of memory. In the end he used himself to help me in discovering the little sleight-of-
hand tricks by which these wonders were performed. I may mention one interesting infantile root of his 
belief that forebodings and premonitions came true. It was brought to light by his recollection that very often, when a date was being fixed for something, his mother used to say: ‘I shan’t be able to on such-and-
such a day. I shall have to stop in bed then.’ And in fact when the day in question arrived she had invariably 
stayed in bed!    There can be no doubt that the patient felt a need for finding experiences of this kind to act as props for 
his superstition, and that it was for that reason that  he occupied himself so much with the inexplicable 
coincidences of everyday life with which we are all familiar, and helped out their shortcomings with 
unconscious activity of his own. I have come across a similar need in many other obsessional patients and have suspected its presence in many more besides. It seems to me easily explicable in view of the 
psychological characteristics of the obsessional neurosis. In this disorder, as I have already explained (p. 2155
), repression is effected not by means of amnesia but by a severance of causal connections 
brought about by a withdrawal of affect. These repressed connections appear to persist in some kind of 
shadowy form (which I have elsewhere compared to an endopsychic perception),¹ and they are thus 
transferred, by a process of projection, into the external world, where they bear witness to what has been effaced from consciousness. 
 
   ¹ The Psychopathology of Everyday Life  (1901 b), Chapter XII, Section C ( b). 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2182  
 
 
   Another mental need, which is also shared by obsessional neurotics and which is in some respects 
related to the one just mentioned, is the need for uncertainty in their life, or for doubt . An enquiry into this 
characteristic leads deep into the investigation of inst inct. The creation of uncertainty is one of the methods 
employed by the neurosis for drawing the patient away from reality  and isolating him from the world - which 
is among the objects of every psychoneurotic disorder. Again, it is only too obvious what efforts are made by the patients themselves in order to be able to avoid certainty and remain in doubt. Some of them, indeed, give a vivid expression to this tendency in a dislike of clocks and watches (for these at least make 
the time of day certain), and in the unconscious artifices which they employ in order to render these doubt 
removing instruments innocuous. Our present patient had developed a peculiar talent for avoiding a knowledge of any facts which would have helped him in deciding his conflict. Thus he was in ignorance 
upon those matters relating to his lady which were the most relevant to the question of his marriage: he was 
ostensibly unable to say who had operated upon her and whether the operation had been unilateral or bilateral. He had to be forced into remembering what he had forgotten and into finding out what he had overlooked. 
   The predilection felt by obsessional neurotics for uncertainty and doubt leads them to turn their thoughts 
by preference to those subjects upon which all mankind are uncertain and upon which our knowledge and 
judgements must necessarily remain open to doubt. The chief subjects of this kind are paternity, length of 
life, life after death, and memory - in the last of which we are all in the habit of believing, without having the 
slightest guarantee of its trustworthiness.¹ 
 
   ¹ As Lichtenberg says, ‘An astronomer knows whether the moon is inhabited or not with about as much certainty as 
he knows who was his father, but not with so much certainty as he knows who was his mother’. A great advance was made in civilization when men decided to put their inferences upon a level with the testimony of their senses and to make the step from matriarchy to patriarchy. The prehistoric figures which show a smaller person sitting upon the head of a larger one are representations of patrilineal descent; Athena had no mother, but sprang from the head of Zeus. A witness who testifies to something before a court of law is still called ‘ Zeuge ’ [literally, ‘begetter’] in German, after the 
part played by the male in the act of procreation; so too in hieroglyphics the word for a ‘witness’ is written with a representation of the male organ.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2183  
 
 
   In obsessional neuroses the uncertainty of memory is  used to the fullest extent as a help in the formation 
of symptoms; and we shall learn directly the part play ed in the actual content of the patients’ thoughts by 
the questions of length of life and life after death. But as an appropriate transition I will first consider one 
particular superstitious trait in our patient to which I have already alluded ( p. 2176 ) and which will no doubt 
have puzzled more than one of my readers.    I refer to the omnipotence  which he ascribed to his thoughts and feelings, and to his wishes, whether 
good or evil. It is, I must admit, decidedly tempting to declare that this idea was a delusion and that it 
oversteps the limits of obsessional neurosis. I have, however, come across the same conviction in another 
obsessional patient; and he was long ago restored to health and is leading a normal life. Indeed, all obsessional neurotics behave as though they shared this conviction. It will be our business to throw some 
light upon these patients’ over-estimation of their powers.  Assuming, without more ado, that this belief is a 
frank acknowledgement of a relic of the old megalomania of infancy, we will proceed to ask our patient for 
the grounds of his conviction. In reply, he adduces two experiences. When he returned for a second visit to the hydropathic establishment at which his disorder had been relieved for the first and only time, he asked 
to be given his old room, for its position had facilitated his relations with one of the nurses. He was told that 
the room was already taken and that it was occupied by  an old professor. This piece of news considerably 
diminished his prospects of successful treatment, and he reacted to it with the unamiable thought: ‘I wish he 
may be struck dead for it!’ A fortnight later he was woken up from his sleep by the disturbing idea of a 
corpse; and in the morning he heard that the professor had really had a stroke, and that he had been carried up into his room at about the time he himself had woken up. The second experience related to an 
unmarried woman, no longer young, though with a great desire to be loved, who had paid him a great deal 
of attention and had once asked him point blank whether he could not love her. He had given her an evasive answer. A few days afterwards he heard that she had thrown herself out of a window. He then began to reproach himself, and said to himself that it would have been in his power to save her life by 
giving her his love. I n this way he became convinced of the omnipotence of his love and of his hatred. 
Without denying the omnipotence of love we may point out that both these instances were concerned with 
death, and we may adopt the obvious explanation that, like other obsessional neurotics, our patient was 
compelled to overestimate the effects of his hostile feelings upon the external world, because a large part of 
their internal, mental effects escaped his conscious knowledge. His love - or rather his hatred - was in truth overpowering; it was precisely they that creat ed the obsessional thoughts, of which he could not 
understand the origin and against which he strove in vain to defend himself.¹  
   ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] The omnipotence of thoughts, or, more accurately speaking, of wishes, has since been 
recognized as an essential element in the mental life of primitive people. See Totem and Taboo (1912-13). 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2184  
 
 
   Our patient had a quite peculiar attitude towards the question of death. He showed the deepest sympathy 
whenever any one died, and religiously attended the funeral; so that among his brothers and sisters he earned the nickname of ‘carrion crow’. In his imagination, too, he was constantly making away with people so as to show his heartfelt sympathy for their bereaved relatives. The death of an elder sister, which took 
place when he was between three and four years old, played a great part in his phantasies, and was 
brought into intimate connection with his childish misdemeanours during the same period. We know, moreover, at what an early age thoughts about his father’s death had occupied his mind, and we may 
regard his illness itself as a reaction to that event, for which he had felt an obsessional wish fifteen years 
earlier. The strange extension of his obsessional fears to the ‘next world’ was nothing else than a compensation for these death-wishes which he had felt against his father. It was introduced eighteen 
months after his father had died, at a time when there had been a revival of his sorrow at the loss, and it 
was designed - in defiance of reality, and in deference to the wish which had previously been showing itself 
in phantasies of every kind - were intended to undo the fact of his father’s death. We have had occasion in several places (pp. 2173
, and 2176 ) to translate the phrase ‘in the next world’ by the words ‘if my father 
were still alive’.    But the behaviour of other obsessional neurotics does not differ greatly from that of our present patient, even though it has not been their fate to come face to face with the phenomenon of death at such an early 
age. Their thoughts are unceasingly occupied with other people’s length of life and possibility of death; their 
superstitious propensities have had no other content  to begin with, and have perhaps no other source 
whatever. But these neurotics need the help of the possibility of death chiefly in order that it may act as a solution of conflicts they have left unsolved. Their essential characteristic is that they are incapable of 
coming to a decision, especially in matters of love; they endeavour to postpone every decision, and, in their 
doubt which person they shall decide for or what measures they shall take against a person, they are obliged to choose as their model the old German courts of  justice, in which the suits were usually brought to 
an end, before judgement had been given, by the death of the parties to the dispute. Thus in every conflict 
which enters their lives they are on the look out for the death of some one who is of importance to them, 
usually of some one they love - such as one of their parents, or a rival, or one of the objects of their love 
between which their inclinations are wavering. But at this point our discussion of the death-complex in 
obsessional neuroses touches upon the problem of the instinctual life of obsessional neurotics. And to this problem we must now turn. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2185  
 
(C)  THE INSTINCTUAL LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS,  
AND THE ORIGINS OF COMPULSION AND DOUBT  
 
   If we wish to obtain a grasp of the psychical forces whose interplay built up this neurosis, we must turn 
back to what we have learnt from the patient on the subj ect of the precipitating causes of his falling ill as a 
grown-up man and as a child. He fell ill when he was in his twenties on being faced with a temptation to marry another woman instead of the one whom he had loved so long; and he avoided a decision of this 
conflict by postponing all the necessary preliminary actions. The means for doing this was given him by his 
neurosis. His hesitation between the lady he loved and the other girl can be reduced to a conflict between his father’s influence and his love for his lady, or, in other words, to a conflicting choice between his father 
and his sexual object, such as had already subsisted (judging from his recollections and obsessional ideas) 
in his remote childhood. All through his life, moreover, he was unmistakably victim to a conflict between love and hatred, in regard both to his lady and to his father. His phantasies of revenge and such 
obsessional phenomena as his obsession for understanding and his exploit with the stone in the road bore 
witness to his divided feelings; and they were to a certain degree comprehensible and normal, for the lady by her original refusal and subsequently by her coolness had given him some excuse for hostility. But his relations with his father were dominated by a similar division of feeling, as we have seen from our 
translation of his obsessional thoughts; and his father, too, must have given him an excuse for hostility in 
his childhood, as indeed we have been able to establish almost beyond question. His attitude towards the lady - a compound of tenderness and hostility - came to a great extent within the scope of his conscious 
knowledge; at most he deceived himself over the degree and violence of his negative feelings. But his 
hostility towards his father, on the contrary, though he had once been acutely conscious of it, had long since vanished from his ken, and it was only in the teeth of the most violent resistance that it could be 
brought back into his consciousness. We may regard the repression of his infantile hatred of his father as 
the event which brought his whole subsequent career under the dominion of the neurosis.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2186  
 
   The conflicts of feeling in our patient whic h we have here enumerated separately were not independent of 
each other, but were bound together in pairs. His hatred of his lady was inevitably coupled with his 
attachment to his father, and inversely his hatred of his father with his attachment to his lady. But the two conflicts of feeling which result from this simplification - namely, the opposition between his relation to his father and to his lady, and the contradiction between his love and his hatred within each of these relations - 
had no connection whatever with each other, either in their content or in their origin. The first of these two 
conflicts corresponds to the normal vacillation between male and female which characterizes every one’s 
choice of a love-object. It is first brought to the child’s notice by the time-honoured question: ‘Which do you 
love most, Daddy or Mummy?’ and it accompanies him through his whole life, whatever may be the relative 
intensity of his feelings to the two sexes or what ever may be the sexual aim upon which he finally becomes 
fixed. But normally this opposition soon loses the c haracter of a hard-and-fast contradiction, of an 
inexorable ‘either-or’. Room is found for satisfying the unequal demands of both sides, although even in a normal person the higher estimation of one sex is always thrown into relief by a depreciation of the other.    The other conflict, that between love and hatred, strikes us more strangely. We know that incipient love is often perceived as hatred, and that love, if it is denied satisfaction, may easily be partly converted into 
hatred, and poets tell us that in the more tempestuous stages of love the two opposed feelings may subsist side by side for a while as though in rivalry with each other. But the chronic  co-existence of love and hatred, 
both directed towards the same person and both of the hi ghest degree of intensity, cannot fail to astonish 
us. We should have expected that the passionate love would long ago have conquered the hatred or been 
devoured by it. And in fact such a protracted survival of two opposites is only possible under quite peculiar psychological conditions and with the co-operation of the state of affairs in the unconscious. The love has 
not succeeded in extinguishing the hatred but only in driving it down into the unconscious; and in the 
unconscious the hatred,   safe from the danger of bei ng destroyed by the operations of consciousness, is 
able to persist and even to grow. In such circumstances the conscious love attains as a rule, by way of reaction, an especially high degree of intensity, so as to be strong enough for the perpetual task of keeping 
its opponent under repression. The necessary condition for the occurrence of such a strange state of affairs 
in a person’s erotic life appears to be that at a very early age, somewhere in the prehistoric period of his infancy, the two opposites should have been split apart and one of them, usually the hatred, have been 
repressed.¹  
   ¹ Compare the discussion on this point during one of the first sessions. - ( Added 1923:) Bleuler subsequently 
introduced the appropriate term ‘ambivalence’ to describe this emotional constellation. See also a further development of this line of thought in my paper ‘The Predisposition to Obsessional Neurosis’ (1913 I). 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2187  
 
   If we consider a number of analyses of obsessional neurotics we shall find it impossible to escape the 
impression that a relation between love and hatred such as we have found in our present patient is among 
the most frequent, the most marked, and probably, ther efore, the most important characteristics of 
obsessional neurosis. But however tempting it may be to bring the problem of the ‘choice of neurosis’ into connection with instinctual life, there are reasons enough for avoiding such a course. For we must 
remember that in every neurosis we come upon the same suppressed instincts behind the symptoms. After 
all, hatred, kept suppressed in the unconscious by love, plays a great part in the pathogenesis of hysteria and paranoia. We know too little of the nature of love to be able to arrive at any definite conclusion here; 
and, in particular, the relation between the negative factor¹ in love and the sadistic components of the libido 
remains completely obscure. What follows is therefore to be regarded as no more than a provisional 
explanation. We may suppose, then, that in the case s of unconscious hatred with which we are concerned 
the sadistic components of love have, from consti tutional causes, been exceptionally strongly developed, 
and have consequently undergone a premature and all t oo thorough suppression, and that the neurotic 
phenomena we have observed arise on the one hand from c onscious feelings of affection which have 
become exaggerated as a reaction, and on the other hand fr om sadism persisting in the unconscious in the 
form of hatred.  
   ¹ Alcibiades says of Socrates in the Symposium : ‘Many a time have I wished that he were dead, and yet I know that I 
should be much more sorry than glad if he were to die: so that I am at my wits’ end,’  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2188  
 
   But in whatever way this remarkable relation of love and hatred is to be explained, its occurrence is 
established beyond any possibility of doubt by the observations made in the present case; and it is 
gratifying to find how easily we can now follow the puzzling processes of an obsessional neurosis by bringing them into relation with this one factor. If an intense love is opposed by an almost equally powerful hatred, and is at the same time inseparably bound up with it, the immediate consequence is certain to be a 
partial paralysis of the will and an incapacity for coming to a decision upon any of those actions for which 
love ought to provide the motive power. But this indecision will not confine itself for long to a single group of actions. For, in the first place, what actions of a lover are not brought into relation with his one principal 
motive? And secondly a man’s attitude in sexual things has the force of a model to which the rest of his 
reactions tend to conform. And thirdly, it is an inherent characteristic in the psychology of an obsessional neurotic to make the fullest possible use of the mechanism of displacement . So the paralysis of his powers 
of decision gradually extends itself over the entire field of the patient’s behaviour. 
   And here we have the domination of compulsion  and doubt  such as we meet with in the mental life of 
obsessional neurotics.    The doubt  corresponds to the patient’s internal percepti on of his own indecision, which, in consequence 
of the inhibition of his love by his hatred, takes possession of him in the face of every intended action. The doubt is in reality a doubt of his own love - which ought to be the most certain thing in his whole mind; and it becomes diffused over everything else, and is especially apt to become displaced on to what is most 
insignificant and small.¹  A man who doubts his own love may, or rather must, doubt every lesser thing.² 
 
   ¹ Compare the use of ‘representation by something very small’ as a technique in making jokes. Cf. Jokes and their 
Relation to the Unconscious . 
   ² So in the love-verses addressed by Hamlet to Ophelia: 
 
   Doubt thou the stars are fire;        Doubt that the sun doth move;    Doubt truth to be a liar;        But never doubt I love.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2189  
 
   It is this same doubt that leads the patient to uncertainty about his protective measures, and to his 
continual repetition of them in order to banish that uncertainty; and it is this doubt, too, that eventually 
brings it about that the patient’s protective acts themselves become as impossible to carry out as his 
original inhibited decision in connection with his love. At the beginning of my investigations I was led to assume another and more general origin for the uncertainty of obsessional neurotics and one which 
seemed to be nearer the normal. If, for instance, while I am writing a letter some one interrupts me with 
questions, I afterwards feel a quite justifiable uncertainty as to what I may not have written under the influence of the disturbance, and, to make sure, I am obliged to read the letter over after I have finished it. 
In the same way I might suppose that the uncertainty of obsessional neurotics, when they are praying, for 
instance, is due to unconscious phantasies constantly mi ngling with their prayers and disturbing them. This 
hypothesis is correct, but it may be easily reconciled with what I have just said. It is true that the patient’s 
uncertainty whether he has carried through a protective measure is due to the disturbing effect of 
unconscious phantasies; but the content of these phantasies is precisely the contrary impulse - which it was the very aim of the prayer to ward off. This became clearly evident in our patient on one occasion, for the disturbing element did not remain unconscious but made its appearance openly. The words he wanted to 
use in his prayer were, ‘ May God protect her ’, but a hostile ‘ not’ suddenly darted out of his unconscious and 
inserted itself into the sentence; and he understood that this was an attempt at a curse ( p. 2152
). If the ‘not’ 
had remained mute, he would have found himself in a state of uncertainty and would have kept on prolonging his prayers indefinitely. But since it became articulate he eventually gave up praying. Before 
doing so, however, he, like other obsessional patients, tried every kind of method for preventing the opposite feeling from insinuating itself. He shortened his prayers, for instance, or said them more rapidly. 
And similarly other patients will endeavour to ‘ isolate’ all such protective acts from other things. But none of 
these technical procedures are of any avail in the long run. If the impulse of love achieves any success by 
displacing itself on to some trivial act, the impulse of hostility will very soon follow it on to its new ground and once more proceed to undo all that it has done. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2190  
 
   And when the obsessional patient lays his finger on the weak spot in the security of our mental life - on 
the untrustworthiness of our memory - the discovery enables him to extend his doubt over everything, even 
over actions which have already been performed and which have so far had no connection with the love-
hatred complex, and over the entire past. I may recall the instance of the woman who had just bought a comb for her little daughter in a shop, and, becoming suspicious of her husband, began to doubt whether 
she had not as a matter of fact been in possession of the comb for a long time. Was not this woman saying 
point-blank: ‘If I can doubt your love’ (and this was only a projection of her doubt of her own love for him), ‘then I can doubt this too, then I can doubt everything’ - thus revealing to us the hidden meaning of neurotic 
doubt?    The compulsion  on the other hand is an attempt at a compensation for the doubt and at a correction of 
the intolerable conditions of inhibition to which the doubt bears witness. If the patient, by the help of 
displacement, succeeds at last in bringing one of his inhibited intentions to a decision, then the intention 
must be carried out. It is true that this intention is not his original one, but the energy dammed up in the latter cannot let slip the opportunity of finding an outlet for its discharge in the substitutive act. Thus this energy makes itself felt now in commands and now in prohibitions, according as the affectionate impulse or 
the hostile one snatches control of the pathway leading to discharge. If it happens that a compulsive 
command cannot be obeyed, the tension becomes intolerabl e and is perceived by the patient in the form of 
extreme anxiety.(But the pathway leading to a substitutive act, even where the displacement has been on 
to something very small, is so hotly contested, that such an act can as a rule be carried out only in the 
shape of a protective measure intimately associated with the very impulse which it is designed to ward off.  
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2191  
 
   Furthermore, by a sort of regression , preparatory acts become substituted for the final decision, thinking 
replaces acting, and, instead of the substitutive act, some thought preliminary to it asserts itself with all the 
force of compulsion. According as this regression from acting to thinking is more or less marked, a case of obsessional neurosis will exhibit the characteristics of obsessive thinking (that is, of obsessional ideas) or of obsessive acting in the narrower sense of the word. True obsessional acts such as these, however, are 
only made possible because they constitute a kind of reconciliation, in the shape of a compromise, between 
the two antagonistic impulses. For obsessional acts tend to approximate more and more - and the longer the disorder lasts the more evident does this become - to  infantile sexual acts of a masturbatory character. 
Thus in this form of the neurosis acts of love are ca rried out in spite of everything, but only by the aid of a 
new kind of regression; for such acts no longer relate to another person, the object of love and hatred, but are auto-erotic acts such as occur in infancy. 
   The first kind of regression, that from acting to thinking, is facilitated by another factor concerned in the 
production of the neurosis. The histories of obsessional patients almost invariably reveal an early development and premature repression of the sexual inst inct of looking and knowing; and, as we know, a 
part of the infantile sexual activity of our present patient was governed by that instinct.¹ 
   We have already mentioned the important part pl ayed by the sadistic instinctual components in the 
genesis of obsessional neuroses. Where the epistemoph ilic instinct is a preponderant feature in the 
constitution of an obsessional patient, brooding becomes the principal symptom of the neurosis. The thought-process itself becomes sexualized, for the se xual pleasure which is normally attached to the 
content of thought becomes shifted on to the act of thinking itself, and the satisfaction derived from 
reaching the conclusion of a line of thought is experienced as a sexual  satisfaction. In the various forms of 
obsessional neurosis in which the epistemophilic instinct plays a part, its relation to thought-processes makes it particularly well adapted to attract the energy which is vainly endeavouring to make its way forward into action, and divert it into the sphere of thought, where there is a possibility of its obtaining pleasurable satisfaction of another sort. In this way, with the help of the epistemophilic instinct, the 
substitutive act may in its turn be replaced by preparatory acts of thought. But procrastination in action is 
soon replaced by lingering over thoughts , and eventually the whole process, together with all its 
peculiarities, is transferred into the new sphere, just as in America an entire house will sometimes be shifted from one site to another. 
 
   ¹ The very high average of intellectual capacity among obsessional patients is probably also connected with this fact. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2192  
 
   I may now venture, upon the basis of the preceding discussion, to determine the psychological 
characteristic, so long sought after, which lends to the products of an obsessional neurosis their ‘obsessive’ 
or compulsive quality. A thought-process is obsessive or compulsive when, in consequence of an inhibition 
(due to a conflict of opposing impulses) at the motor end of the psychical system, it is undertaken with an expenditure of energy which (as regards both quality and quantity) is normally reserved for actions alone; 
or, in other words, an obsessive or compulsive thought is one whose function it is to represent an act 
regressively . No one, I think, will question my assumption that processes of thought are ordinarily 
conducted (on grounds of economy) with smaller displacements of energy, probably at a higher level, than are acts intended to bring about discharge or to modify the external world. 
   The obsessive thought which has forced its way into consciousness with such excessive violence has next to be secured against the efforts made by conscious thought to resolve it. As we already know, this 
protection is afforded by the distortion  which the obsessive thought has undergone before becoming 
conscious. But this is not the only means employed. In addition, each separate obsessional idea is almost 
invariably removed from the situation in which it originat ed and in which, in spite of its distortion, it would be 
most easily comprehensible. With this end in view, in the first place an interval of time is inserted  between 
the pathogenic situation and the obsession that arises from it, so as to lead astray any conscious 
investigation of its causal connections, and in the second place the content of the obsession is taken out of its particular setting by being generalized . Our patient’s ‘obsession for understanding’ is an example of this 
(p. 2150
). But perhaps a better one is afforded by another patient. This was a woman who prohibited 
herself from wearing any sort of personal adornment, though the exciting cause of the prohibition related only to one particular piece of jewellery: she had envied her mother the possession of it and had had hopes 
that one day she would inherit it. Finally, if we care to distinguish verbal distortion from distortion of content, 
there is yet another means by which the obsession is pr otected against conscious attempts at solution. And 
that is the choice of an indefinite or ambiguous wo rding. After being misunderstood, the wording may find 
its way into the patient’s ‘deliria’, and whatever further processes of development or substitution his 
obsession undergoes will then be based upon the misunder standing and not upon the proper sense of the 
text. Observation will show, however, that the deliria constantly tend to form new connections with that part 
of the matter and wording of the obsession which is not present in consciousness. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2193  
 
   I should like to go back once more to the instinctual life of obsessional neurotics and add one more 
remark upon it. It turned out that our patient, besides all his other characteristics, was a renifleur . By his 
own account, when he was a child he had recognized every one by their smell, like a dog; and even when 
he was grown up he was more susceptible to sensations of smell than most people.¹ I have met with the same characteristic in other neurotics, both in hysterical and in obsessional patients, and I have come to 
recognize that a tendency to taking pleasure in smell, which has become extinct since childhood, may play 
a part in the genesis of neurosis.² And here I should like to raise the general question whether the atrophy of the sense of smell (which was an inevitable result of man’s assumption of an erect posture) and the 
consequent organic repression of his pleasure in smell may not have had a considerable share in the origin 
of his susceptibility to nervous disease. This would a fford us some explanation of why, with the advance of 
civilization, it is precisely the sexual life that must  fall a victim to repression. For we have long known the 
intimate connection in the animal organization between the sexual instinct and the function of the olfactory organ.  
   ¹ I may add that in his childhood he had been subject to strong coprophilic propensities. In this connection his anal 
erotism has already been noticed ( p. 2166 ). 
   ² For instance, in certain forms of fetishism. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis2194  
 
 
   In bringing this paper to a close I may express a hope that, though my communication is incomplete in 
every sense, it may at least stimulate other worker s to throw more light upon the obsessional neurosis by a 
deeper investigation of the subject. What is characteristic of this neurosis - what differentiates it from hysteria - is not, in my opinion, to be found in instinctual life but in the psychological field. I cannot take 
leave of my patient without putting on paper my impression that he had, as it were, disintegrated into three 
personalities: into one unconscious personality, that is to say, and into two preconscious ones between 
which his consciousness could oscillate. His unconscious comprised those of his impulses which had been 
suppressed at an early age and which might be described as passionate and evil impulses. In his normal 
state he was kind, cheerful, and sensible - an enlightened and superior kind of person - while in his third psychological organization he paid homage to superstition and asceticism. Thus he was able to have two 
different creeds and two different outlooks upon life. This second preconscious personality comprised 
chiefly the reaction-formations against his repressed wishes, and it was easy to foresee that it would have swallowed up the normal personality if the illness had lasted much longer. I have at present an opportunity of studying a lady suffering severely from obsessional acts. She has become similarly disintegrated into an 
easy-going and lively personality and into an exceedingly gloomy and ascetic one. She puts forward the 
first of them as her official ego, while in fact she is dominated by the second. Both of these psychical organizations have access to her consciousness, but behind her ascetic personality may be discerned the 
unconscious part of her being - quite unknown to her and composed of ancient and long-repressed wishful 
impulses.¹  
   ¹ (Footnote added 1923:) The patient’s mental health was restored to him by the analysis which I have reported upon 
in these pages. Like so many other young men of value and promise, he perished in the Great War. 
 
Notes Upon A Case Of Obsessional Neurosis