Praise for Sigmund Freud’s 
The Interpretation of Dreams
“Freud’s classic. Freud has been a dominant force in Western
thinking and here’s the book that started it all.”
—Psychology Today
“[An] epoch-making book.”
—The Economist
“Today, those practicing quicker therapies and psychopharma-cology outnumber psychoanalysts, but Dr. Freud is indisputablywith us, informing the very way we think about being human.”
—Life magazine
“Freud’s achievement was to give a name to the fears of his age.”
—New Statesman
“At the beginning of our century, the publication of The Inter-
pretation of Dreams changed our everyday perception of that
 essential component of human existence.”
—The Daily Mail
“Sigmund Freud’s The Interpretation of Dreams sold fewer than
400 copies in its first six years, but the fires it lit are still blazing.”
—Brooke Gladstone, co-host and managing editor, 
NPR’s On the Media9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page a9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page bSIGMUND
FREUD
THE INTERPRETATION
OF DREAMS
Translated from the German and edited by
James Strachey
Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
New York9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page iiiThis complete and deﬁnitive text, translated and edited by James Strachey,
was ﬁrst published in the United States in 1955 by Basic Books, Inc. byarrangement with George Allen & Unwin Ltd. and The Hogarth Press, Ltd.
T ranslation copyright © 1955 by James Strachey.This edition published by Basic Books in 2010.All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this
book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without writtenpermission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articlesand reviews. For information, address the Perseus Books Group, 387 ParkAvenue South, New York, NY 10016–8810.
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk
purchases in the United States by corporations, institutions, and otherorganizations. For more information, please contact the Special MarketsDepartment at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200,Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 255-1514, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Set in 10 point Adobe GaramondLibrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataFreud, Sigmund, 1856–1939.
[T raumdeutung. English]
The interpretation of dreams / Sigmund Freud ; translated from the
German and edited by James Strachey.
p.  cm.
“This complete and deﬁnitive text, translated and edited by James Strachey,
was ﬁrst published in the United States in 1955 by Basic Books.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.ISBN 978-0-465-01977-9 (alk. paper)1. Dreams. 2. Psychoanalysis. I. Strachey, James. II. Title. 
BF1078.F72 2010154.6'3—dc22 2009034599
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 19780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page ivvCONTENTS
Editor’s Introduction xi
Preface to the First Edition xxiii
Preface to the Second Edition xxv
Preface to the T hird Edition xxvii
Preface to the Fourth Edition xxviii
Preface to the Fifth Edition xxix
Preface to the Sixth Edition xxix
Preface to the Eighth Edition xxxi
Preface to the T hird (Revised) 
English Edition xxxii
Chapter
I THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE DEALING
WITH THE PROBLEMS OF DREAMS 35
(a) The Relation of Dreams to Waking Life 41
(b) The Material of Dreams—Memory in Dreams 44
(c) The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams 54
(1) External Sensory Stimuli 55
(2) Internal (Subjective) Sensory Excitations 62(3) Internal Organic Somatic Stimuli 65(4) Psychical Sources of Stimulation 70
(d) Why Dreams Are Forgotten After Waking 73(e) The Distinguishing Psychological 
Characteristics of Dreams 77
(f) The Moral Sense in Dreams 939780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page v(g) Theories of Dreaming and Its Function 101
(h) The Relations Between Dreams and 
Mental Diseases 113
Postscript, 1909 118
Postscript, 1914 120
II THE METHOD OF INTERPRETING 
DREAMS: AN ANALYSIS OF A 
SPECIMEN DREAM 121
III A DREAM IS THE FULFILMENT 
OF A WISH 147
IV DISTORTION IN DREAMS 159
V THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES 
OF DREAMS 187
(a) Recent and Indifferent Material in Dreams 188
(b) Infantile Material as a Source of Dreams 211(c) The Somatic Sources of Dreams 240
(d) Typical Dreams 259
(α) Embarrassing Dreams of Being Naked 260(β) Dreams of the Death of Persons of 
Whom the Dreamer Is Fond 266
(γ) Other Typical Dreams 288
(δ) Examination Dreams 291
VI THE DREAM-WORK 295
(a) The Work of Condensation 296
(b) The Work of Displacement 322
(c) The Means of Representation in Dreams 326(d) Considerations of Representability 353
(e) Representation by Symbols in Dreams—
Some Further Typical Dreams 363
(f) Some Examples—Calculations and 
Speeches in Dreams 414
(g) Absurd Dreams—Intellectual Activity in Dreams 434vi Contents9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page vi(h) Affects in Dreams 466
(i) Secondary Revision 493
VII THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-
PROCESSES 513
(a) The Forgetting of Dreams 516
(b) Regression 535
(c) Wish-Fulﬁlment 550
(d) Arousal by Dreams—The Function of 
Dreams—Anxiety-Dreams 572
(e) The Primary and Secondary Processes—
Repression 585
(f) The Unconscious and Consciousness—Reality 605
APPENDIX A: A Premonitory Dream Fulﬁlled 617
APPENDIX B: List of Writings by Freud Dealing
Predominantly or Largely with Dreams 621
ADDITIONAL NOTES 623
BIBLIOGRAPHY ( a) Author Index and 
List of Works Quoted 625
(b) List of Works on Dreams 
Published Before 1900 647
INDEX OF DREAMS (a) Freud’s Own Dreams 653(b) Other People’s Dreams 654
GENERAL INDEX 657vii Contents9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page vii9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page viiiNOTE
The present edition is a reprint of that included in Vols. IV and V of the
Standard Edition, London, 1953 (The Hogarth Press and The Institute
of Psycho-Analysis). A few additional notes will be found on p. 623. Theeditor is deeply indebted to Miss Anna Freud for her unfailing help andcriticism at every stage of the work.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page ix9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xEDITOR’S INTRODUCTION
(1) 
bibliographical
(a) German Editions:
1900 Die Traumdeutung . Leipzig and Vienna: Franz Deuticke.
Pp. iv + 375.
1909 2nd ed. (Enlarged and revised.) Same publishers. Pp. vi + 389.
1911 3rd ed. (Enlarged and revised.) Same publishers. Pp. x + 418.1914 4th ed. (Enlarged and revised.) Same publishers. Pp. x + 498.1919 5th ed. (Enlarged and revised.) Same publishers. Pp. ix + 474.1921 6th ed. 1922 7th ed. 
1925 Vol. II and part of Vol. III of Freud, Gesammelte Schriften. (Enlarged
and revised.) Leipzig, Vienna and Zurich: Internationaler Psy-choanalytischer Verlag. Pp. 543 and 1–185.
1930 8th ed. (Enlarged and revise d.) Leipzig and Vienna: Franz Deuticke.
Pp. x + 435.
1942 In Double Volume II & III of Freud, Gesammelte Werke. (Reprint
of 8th ed.) London: Imago Publishing Co. Pp. xv and 1–642.
(b) English Translations:
1913 By A. A. Brill. London: George Allen & Co.; New York:
The Macmillan Co. Pp. xiii + 510.
1915 2nd ed. London: George Allen & Unwin; New York: The 
Macmillan Co. Pp. xiii + 510.
1932 3rd ed. (Completely revised and largely rewritten by various 
unspeciﬁed hands.) London: George Allen & Unwin; NewYork: The Macmillan Co. Pp. 600.
xi(Reprints of 5th ed. except for new preface and revisedbibliography.) Pp. vii + 478./H208539780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xi1938 In The Basic Writings of Sigmund Freud . Pp. 181–549. (Reprint of
3rd ed. with almost the whole of Chapter _ omitted.) New
York: Random House.
The present, entirely new, translation is by James Strachey.
Actually Die Traumdeutung made its ﬁrst appearance in 1899. The fact
is mentioned by Freud at the beginning of his second paper on Josef Pop-per (1932 c): ‘It was in the winter of 1899 that my book on the interpre-
tation of dreams (though its title-page was post-dated into the newcentury) at length lay before me. But we now have more precise informa-tion from his correspondence with Wilhelm Fliess (Freud, 1950 a). In his
letter of November 5, 1899 (Letter 123), Freud announces that ‘yesterdayat length the book appeared’; and from the preceding letter it seems thatFreud himself had received two advance copies about a fortnight earlier,one of which he had sent to Fliess as a birthday present.
The Interpretation of Dreams was one of the two books—the Three Es-
says on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d ) was the other—which Freud kept
more or less systematically ‘up to date’ as they passed through their seriesof editions. After the third edition of the present work, the changes in itwere not indicated in any way; and this produced a somewhat confusingeffect on the reader of the later editions, since the new material sometimesimplied a knowledge of modiﬁcations in Freud’s views dating from timeslong subsequent to the period at which the book was originally written. Inan attempt to get over this difﬁculty, the editors of the ﬁrst collected edi-tion of Freud’s works (the Gesammelte Schriften) reprinted the ﬁrst edition
of The Interpretation of Dreams in its original form in one volume, and put
into a second volume all the material that had been added subsequently.Unfortunately, however, the work was not carried out very systematically,for the additions themselves were not dated and thereby much of the ad-vantage of the plan was sacriﬁced. In subsequent editions a return wasmade to the old, undifferentiated single volume.
By far the greater number of additions dealing with any single subject
are those concerned with symbolism in dreams. Freud explains in his ‘His-tory of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’ (1914 d), as well as at the begin-
ning of Chapter VI, Section E (p. 363), of the present work, that he arrivedlate at a full realization of the importance of this side of the subject. In theﬁrst edition, the discussion of symbolism was limited to a few pages and asingle specimen dream (giving instances of sexual symbolism) at the end ofxii Editor’s Introduction9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xiithe Section on ‘Considerations of Representability’ in Chapter VI. In the
second edition (1909), nothing was added to this Section; but, on the otherhand, several pages on sexual symbolism were inserted at the end of the Sec-tion on ‘Typical Dreams’ in Chapter V. These were very considerably ex-panded in the third edition (1911), while the original passage in ChapterVI still remained unaltered. A reorganization was evidently overdue, and inthe fourth edition (1914) an entirely new Section on Symbolism was intro-duced into Chapter VI, and into this the material on the subject that hadaccumulated in Chapter V was now transplanted, together with a quantityof entirely fresh material. No changes in the structure of the book were
made in later editions, though much further matter was added. After thetwo-volume version (1925)—that is, in the eighth edition (1930)—somepassages in the Section on ‘Typical Dreams’ in Chapter V, which had beenaltogether dropped at an earlier stage, were re-inserted.
In the fourth, ﬁfth, sixth and seventh editions (that is from 1914 to
1922), two essays by Otto Rank (on ‘Dreams and Creative Writing’ and‘Dreams and Myths’) were printed at the end of Chapter V_, but weresubsequently omitted.
There remain the bibliographies. The ﬁrst edition contained a list of
some eighty books, to the great majority of which Freud refers in the text.This was left unchanged in the second and third editions, but in the thirda second list was added, of some forty books written since 1900. There-after both lists began to increase rapidly, till in the eighth edition the ﬁrstlist contained some 260 works and the second over 200. At this stage onlya minority of the titles in the ﬁrst (pre-1900) list were of books actuallymentioned in Freud’s text; while, on the other hand, the second (post-1900) list (as may be gathered from Freud’s own remarks in his variousprefaces) could not really keep pace with the production of analytic orquasi-analytic writings on the subject. Furthermore, quite a number ofworks quoted by Freud in the text were not to be found in either list. It
seems probable that, from the third edition onwards, Otto Rank becamechieﬂy responsible for these  bibliographies.
(2) 
historical
The publication of Freud’s correspondence with Fliess enables us to
follow the composition of The Interpretation of Dreams in some detail. Inxiii Editor’s Introduction9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xiiihis ‘History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’ (1914 d), Freud wrote,
looking back upon his leisurely rate of publication in earlier days: ‘ The In-
terpretation of Dreams, for instance, was ﬁnished in all essentials at the be-
ginning of 1896 but was not written down until the summer of 1899.’Again, in the introductory remarks to his paper on the psychological con-sequences of the anatomical distinction between the sexes (1925 j), he
wrote: ‘My Interpretation of Dreams and my “Fragment of an Analysis of
a Case of Hysteria” [1905 e] . . . were suppressed by me—if not for the
nine years enjoined by Horace—at all events for four or ﬁve years beforeI allowed them to be published.’ We are now in a position to amplify andin certain respects to correct these later recollections, on the basis of theauthor’s contemporary evidence.
Apart from a number of scattered references to the subject—which, in
his correspondence, go back at least as early as 1882—the ﬁrst importantpublished evidence of Freud’s interest in dreams occurs in the course of along footnote to the ﬁrst of his case histories (that of Frau Emmy von N.,under the date of May 15) in Breuer and Freud’s Studies on Hysteria
(1895). He is discussing the fact that neurotic patients seem to be undera necessity to bring into association with one another any ideas that hap-pen to be simultaneously present in their minds. He goes on: ‘Not longago I was able to convince myself of the strength of this compulsion to-wards association from some observations made in a different ﬁeld. Forseveral weeks I found myself obliged to exchange my usual bed for aharder one, in which I had more numerous or more vivid dreams, or inwhich, it may be, I was unable to reach the normal depth of sleep. In theﬁrst quarter of an hour after waking I remembered all the dreams I hadhad during the night, and I took the trouble to write them down and tryto solve them. I succeeded in tracing all these dreams back to two factors:(1) to the necessity for working out any ideas which I had only dweltupon cursorily during the day—which had only been touched upon andnot ﬁnally dealt with; and (2) to the compulsion to link together anyideas that might be present in the same state of consciousness. The sense-less and contradictory character of the dreams could be traced back to theuncontrolled ascendancy of this latter factor.’
This passage cannot unfortunately be exactly dated. The preface to the
volume was written in April 1895. A letter of June 22, 1894 (Letter 19),seems to imply that the case histories were already ﬁnished then, and thiswas quite certainly so by March 4, 1895. Freud’s letter of that date (Letter22) is of particular interest, as giving the ﬁrst hint of the theory of wish-xiv Editor’s Introduction9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xivfulﬁlment: in the course of it he quotes the story of the medical student’s
‘dream of convenience’ which is included on p. 150 of the present volume.It was not, however, until July 24, 1895, that the analysis of his own dreamof Irma’s injection—the specimen dream of Chapter II— established thattheory deﬁnitely in Freud’s mind. (See Letter 137 of June, 1900.) In Sep-tember of this same year (1895) Freud wrote the ﬁrst part of his ‘Projectfor a Scientiﬁc Psychology’ (published as an Appendix to the Fliess corres-pondence) and Sections 19, 20 and 21 of this ‘Project’ constitute a ﬁrst ap-proach to a coherent theory of dreams. It already includes many importantelements which re-appear in the present work, such as (1) the wish- fulﬁlling character of dreams, (2) their hallucinatory character, (3) the re-gressive functioning of the mind in hallucinations and dreams (this hadalready been indicated by Breuer in his theoretical contribution to Studies
on Hysteria), (4) the fact that the state of sleep involves motor paralysis, (5)the nature of the mechanism of displacement in dreams and (6) the simi-larity between the mechanisms of dreams and of neurotic symptoms.More than all this, however, the ‘Project’ gives a clear indication of what isprobably the most momentous of the discoveries given to the world in The
Interpretation of Dreams —the distinction between the two different modes
of mental functioning, the Primary and Secondary Processes.
This, however, is far from exhausting the importance of the ‘Project’
and of the letters to Fliess written in connection with it towards the endof 1895. It is no exaggeration to say that much of the seventh chapter ofThe Interpretation of Dreams , and, indeed, of Freud’s later ‘metapsycho-
logical’ studies, has only become fully intelligible since the publication ofthe ‘Project.’
Students of Freud’s theoretical writings have been aware that even in
his profoundest psychological speculations little or no discussion is to befound upon some of the most fundamental of the concepts of which he
makes use: such concepts, for instance, as ‘mental energy,’ ‘sums of exci-tation,’ ‘cathexis,’ ‘quantity,’ ‘quality,’ ‘intensity,’ and so on. Almost theonly explicit approach to a discussion of these concepts among Freud’spublished works is the penultimate sentence of his ﬁrst paper on the‘Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’ (1894 a), in which he lays down a hypoth-
esis that ‘in mental functions something is to be distinguished—a chargeof affect or sum of excitation—which possesses all the characteristics of aquantity (though we have no means of measuring it), which is capable ofincrease, diminution, displacement and discharge, and which is spreadover the memory-traces of ideas somewhat as an electric charge is spreadxv Editor’s Introduction9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xvover the surface of a body.’ The paucity of explanation of such basic no-
tions in Freud’s later writings suggests that he was taking it for grantedthat they were as much a matter of course to his readers as they were tohimself; and we owe it as a debt of gratitude to the posthumously pub-lished correspondence with Fliess that it throws so much light preciselyupon these obscurities.
It is, of course, impossible to enter here into any detailed discussion of
the subject, and the reader must be referred to the volume itself (Freud,1950a ) and to Dr. Kris’s illuminating introduction to it.
1The crux of the
position can, however, be indicated quite simply. The essence of Freud’s‘Project’ lay in the notion of combining into a single whole two theoriesof different origin. The ﬁrst of these was derived ultimately from thephysiological school of Helmholtz, of which Freud’s teacher, the physiol-ogist Brücke, was a principal member. According to this theory, neuro-physiology, and consequently psychology, was governed by purelychemico-physical laws. Such, for instance, was the ‘law of constancy,’ fre-quently mentioned both by Freud and Breuer and expressed in theseterms in 1892 (in a posthumously published draft, Breuer and Freud,1940): ‘The nervous system endeavours to keep constant something in itsfunctional condition that may be described as the “sum of excitation.”’The greater part of the theoretical contribution made by Breuer (anotherdisciple of the Helmholtz school) to the Studies on Hysteria was an elabo-
rate construction along these lines. The second main theory called intoplay by Freud in his ‘Project’ was the anatomical doctrine of the neurone,which was becoming accepted by neuro-anatomists at the end of theeighties. (The term ‘neurone’ was only introduced, by Waldeyer, in1891.) This doctrine laid it down that the functional unit of the centralnervous system was a distinct cell, having no direct anatomical continuitywith adjacent cells. The opening sentences of the ‘Project’ show clearlyhow its basis lay in a combination of these two theories. Its aim, wroteFreud, was ‘to represent psychical processes as quantitatively determinedstates of speciﬁable material particles.’ He went on to postulate that these‘material particles’ were the neurones and that what distinguished theirbeing in a state of activity from their being in a state of rest was a ‘quan-tity’ which was ‘subject to the general laws of motion.’ Thus a neuronexvi Editor’s Introduction
1 Bernfeld’s paper on ‘Freud’s Earliest Theories’ (1944) is also of great interest in
this connection.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xvimight either be ‘empty’ or ‘ﬁlled with a certain quantity,’ that is ‘ca -
thected.’1‘Nervous excitation’ was to be interpreted as a ‘quantity’ ﬂow-
ing through a system of neurones, and such a current might either beresisted or facilitated according to the state of the ‘contact-barriers’ be-tween the neurones. (It was only later, in 1897, that the term ‘synapse’was introduced by Foster and Sherrington.) The functioning of the wholenervous system was subject to a general principle of ‘inertia,’ according towhich neurones always tend to get rid of any ‘quantity’ with which theymay be ﬁlled—a principle correlative with the principle of ‘constancy.’Using these and similar concepts as his bricks, Freud constructed a highlycomplicated and extraordinarily ingenious working model of the mind asa piece of neurological machinery.
A principal part was played in Freud’s scheme by a hypothetical divi-
sion of the neurones into three classes or systems, differentiated accordingto their modes of functioning. Of these the ﬁrst two were concerned re-spectively with external stimuli and internal excitations. Both of these op-
erated on a purely quantitative basis; that is to say, their actions were
wholly determined by the magnitude of the nervous excitations imping-ing on them. The third system was correlated with the qualitative differ-
ences which distinguish conscious sensations and feelings. This divisionof the neurones into three systems was the basis of elaborate physiologicalexplanations of such things as the working of memory, the perception ofreality, the process of thought, and also the phenomena of dreaming andof neurotic disorder.
But obscurities and difﬁculties began to accumulate and, during the
months after writing the ‘Project,’ Freud was continually emending histheories. As time passed, his interest was gradually diverted from neuro-logical and theoretical on to psychological and clinical problems, and heeventually abandoned the entire scheme. And when some years later, inthe seventh chapter of the present book, he took the theoretical problemup once more—though he certainly never gave up his belief that ulti-mately a physical groundwork for psychology would be established—theneuro-physiological basis was ostensibly dropped. Nevertheless—and thisis why the ‘Project’ is of importance to readers of The Interpretation ofxvii Editor’s Introduction
1 It must be emphasized that these speculations of Freud’s date from a period
many years before any systematic investigations had been made into the nature
of nervous impulses and the conditions governing their transmission.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xviiDreams —much of the general pattern of the earlier scheme, and many of
its elements, were carried over into the new one. The systems of neurones
were replaced by psychical systems or agencies; a hypothetical ‘cathexis’ of
psychical energy took the place of the physical ‘quantity’; the principle ofinertia became the basis of the pleasure (or, as Freud here called it, the un-pleasure) principle. Moreover, some of the detailed accounts of psychicalprocesses given in the seventh chapter owe much to their physiologicalforerunners and can be more easily understood by reference to them. Thisapplies, for instance, to the description of the laying down of memory-traces in the ‘mnemic systems,’ to the discussion of the nature of wishesand of the different ways of satisfying them, and to the stress laid uponthe part played by verbal thought-processes in the making of adjustmentsto the demands of reality.
All of this is enough largely to justify Freud’s assertion that The Inter-
pretation of Dreams ‘was ﬁnished in all essentials at the beginning of
1896.’ Nevertheless, we are now in a position to add some qualiﬁcations.Thus, the existence of the Oedipus complex was only established duringthe summer and autumn of 1897 (Letters 64 to 71); and though this wasnot in itself a direct contribution to the theory of dreams, it neverthelessplayed a large part in emphasizing the infantile roots of the unconscious
wishes underlying dreams. Of more obvious theoretical importance wasthe discovery of the omnipresence in dreams of the wish to sleep. Thiswas announced by Freud as late as on June 9, 1899 (Letter 108). Again,the ﬁrst hint at the process of ‘secondary revision’ seems to be given in aletter of July 7, 1897 (Letter 66). The similarity in structure betweendreams and neurotic symptoms had, as we have seen, already been re-marked on in the ‘Project’ in 1895, and was alluded to at intervals up tothe autumn of 1897. Curiously enough, however, it seems thereafter tohave been forgotten; for it is announced on January 3, 1899 (Letter 101),as a new discovery and as an explanation of why the book had so long re-mained unﬁnished.
The Fliess correspondence enables us to follow the actual process of
composition in some detail. The idea of writing the book is ﬁrst men-tioned by Freud in May 1897, but quickly put on one side, probably be-cause his interest began to be centred at that time on his self-analysis,which was to lead during the summer to his discovery of the Oedipuscomplex. At the end of the year the book was taken up once more, and inthe early months of 1898 a ﬁrst draft of the whole work seems to havexviii Editor’s Introduction9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xviiibeen completed, with the exception of the ﬁrst chapter.1Work upon it
came to a standstill in June of that year and was not resumed after the
summer vacation. On October 23, 1898 (Letter 99), Freud writes that thebook ‘remains stationary, unchanged; I have no motive for preparing it forpublication, and the gap in the psychology [i.e., Chapter VII] as well asthe gap left by removing the completely analysed sample dream are obsta-cles to my ﬁnishing it which I have not yet overcome.’ There was a pauseof many months, till suddenly, and, as Freud himself writes, ‘for no par-ticular reason,’ the book began to stir again towards the end of May 1899.Thereafter it proceeded rapidly. The ﬁrst chapter, dealing with the litera-ture, which had always been a bug-bear to Freud, was ﬁnished in June andthe ﬁrst pages sent to the printer. The revision of the middle chapters wascompleted by the end of August, and the last, psychological, chapter wasentirely re-written and the ﬁnal pages despatched early in September.
Both the manuscript and the proofs were regularly submitted by Freud
to Fliess for his criticism. He seems to have had considerable inﬂuence onthe ﬁnal shape of the book, and to have been responsible for the omission(evidently on grounds of discretion) of an analysis of one importantdream of Freud’s own (cf. p. xviii). But the severest criticisms came fromthe author himself, and these were directed principally against the styleand literary form. ‘I think,’ he wrote on September 21, 1899 (Letter119), when the book was ﬁnished, ‘my self-criticism was not entirely un-justiﬁed. Somewhere hidden within me I too have some fragmentarysense of form, some appreciation of beauty as a species of perfection; andthe involved sentences of my book on dreams, bolstered up on indirectphrases and with sidelong glances at their subject-matter, have gravely af-fronted some ideal within me. And I am scarcely wrong in regarding thislack of form as a sign of an incomplete mastery of the material.’
But in spite of these self-criticisms, and in spite of the depression which
followed the almost total neglect of the book by the outside world—only351 copies were sold in the ﬁrst six years after publication— The Interpre-
tation of Dreams was always regarded by Freud as his most important
work: ‘Insight such as this,’ as he wrote in his preface to the third Englishedition, ‘falls to one’s lot but once in a lifetime.’xix Editor’s Introduction
1 This must be what is alluded to in a passage on p. 483 of the present work, in
which Freud remarks that he had ‘postponed the printing of the ﬁnished manu-
script for more than a year.’ Actually the ﬁrst chapter had still to be written.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xix(3) 
the present english edition
The present translation is based on the eighth (1930) German edition,
the last published during its author’s life. At the same time, it differs from
all previous editions (both German and English) in an important respect,for it is in the nature of a ‘Variorum’ edition. An effort has been made toindicate, with dates, every alteration of substance introduced into the booksince its ﬁrst issue. Wherever material has been dropped or greatly modi-ﬁed in later editions, the cancelled passage or earlier version is given in afootnote. The only exception is that Rank’s two appendices to Chapter VIhave been omitted. The question of their inclusion was seriously consid-ered; but it was decided against doing so. The essays are entirely self- contained and have no direct connections with Freud’s book; they wouldhave ﬁlled another ﬁfty pages or so; and they would be particularly un -enlightening to English readers, since they deal in the main with Germanliterature and German mythology.
The bibliographies have been entirely recast. The ﬁrst of these con-
tains a list of every work actually referred to in the text or footnotes. Thisbibliography is also arranged to serve as an Author Index. The secondbibliography contains all the works in the German pre-1900 list notac-
tually quoted by Freud. It has seemed worth while to print this, since noother comparably full bibliography of the older literature on dreams iseasily accessible. Writings after 1900, apart from those actually quoted
and consequently included in the ﬁrst bibliography, have been disre-garded. A warning must, however, be issued in regard to both my lists.Investigation has shown a very high proportion of errors in the Germanbibliographies. These have been corrected wherever possible; but quite anumber of the entries have proved to be untraceable in London, andthese (which are distinguished by an asterisk) must be regarded as suspect.
Editorial additions are printed in square brackets. Many readers will
no doubt be irritated by the number of references and other explanatorynotes. The references, however, are essentially to Freud’s own writings,and very few will be found to other authors (apart, of course, from refer-ences made by Freud himself). In any case, the fact must be faced thatThe Interpretation of Dreams is one of the major classics of scientiﬁc liter-
ature and that the time has come to treat it as such. It is the editor’s hopeand belief that actually the references, and more particularly the cross-xx Editor’s Introduction9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xx references to other parts of the work itself, will make it easier for serious
students to follow the intricacies of the material. Readers in search ofmere entertainment—if there are any such—must steel themselves to dis-regard these parentheses.
A word must be added upon the translation itself. Great attention has
had, of course, to be paid to the details of the wording of the text ofdreams. Where the English rendering strikes the reader as unusually stiff,he may assume that the stiffness has been imposed by some verbal neces-sity determined by the interpretation that is to follow. Where there are in-consistencies between different versions of the text of the same dream, hemay assume that there are parallel inconsistencies in the original. Theseverbal difﬁculties culminate in the fairly frequent instances in which aninterpretation depends entirely upon a pun. There are three methods ofdealing with such situations. The translator can omit the dream entirely,or he can replace it by another parallel dream, whether derived from hisown experience or fabricated ad hoc. These two methods have been the
ones adopted in the main in the earlier translations of the book. But thereare serious objections to them. We must once more remember that we aredealing with a scientiﬁc classic. What we want to hear about are the ex-amples chosen by Freud—not by someone else. Accordingly the presenttranslator has adopted the pedantic and tiresome third alternative ofkeeping the original German pun and laboriously explaining it in asquare bracket or footnote. Any amusement that might be got out of itcompletely evaporates in the process. But that, unfortunately, is a sacriﬁcethat has to be made.
Help in the laborious task of proof-reading has been generously given
(among others) by Mrs. R. S. Partridge and Dr. C. F . Rycroft. Mrs. Par-tridge is also largely responsible for the index. The revision of the bibli-ographies has in the main been carried out by Mr. G. Talland.
Finally, the editor’s thanks are due to Dr. Ernest Jones for his constant
advice and encouragement. The ﬁrst volume of his Freud biography willbe found to throw invaluable light on the background of this work as awhole, as well as on many of its details.xxi Editor’s Introduction9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxi9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxiiPreface to the First Edition
I have attempted in this volume to give an account of the interpretation
of dreams; and in doing so I have not, I believe, trespassed beyond the
sphere of interest covered by neuro-pathology. For psychological investi-gation shows that the dream is the ﬁrst member of a class of abnormalpsychical phenomena of which further members, such as hysterical pho-bias, obsessions and delusions, are bound for practical reasons to be amatter of concern to physicians. As will be seen in the sequel, dreams canmake no such claim to practical importance; but their theoretical value asa paradigm is on the other hand proportionately greater. Anyone who hasfailed to explain the origin of dream-images can scarcely hope to under-stand phobias, obsessions or delusions or to bring a therapeutic inﬂuenceto bear on them.
But the same correlation that is responsible for the importance of the
subject must also bear the blame for the deﬁciencies of the present work.The broken threads which so frequently interrupt my presentation arenothing less than the many points of contact between the problem of theformation of dreams and the more comprehensive problems of psycho-pathology. These cannot be treated here, but, if time and strength allowand further material comes to hand, will form the subject of later communications.
The difﬁculties of presentation have been further increased by the pe-
culiarities of the material which I have had to use to illustrate the inter-preting of dreams. It will become plain in the course of the work itselfwhy it is that none of the dreams already reported in the literature of thesubject or collected from unknown sources could be of any use for mypurposes. The only dreams open to my choice were my own and those ofmy patients undergoing psychoanalytic treatment. But I was precludedfrom using the latter material by the fact that in its case the dream- processes were subject to an undesirable complication owing to the added
xxiii9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxiiipresence of neurotic features. But if I was to report my own dreams, it in-
evitably followed that I should have to reveal to the public gaze more ofthe intimacies of my mental life than I liked, or than is normally neces-sary for any writer who is a man of science and not a poet. Such was thepainful but unavoidable necessity; and I have submitted to it rather thantotally abandon the possibility of giving the evidence for my psychologi-cal ﬁndings. Naturally, however, I have been unable to resist the tempta-tion of taking the edge off some of my indiscretions by omissions andsubstitutions. But whenever this has happened, the value of my instanceshas been very deﬁnitely diminished. I can only express a hope that readersof this book will put themselves in my difﬁcult situation and treat mewith indulgence, and further, that anyone who ﬁnds any sort of referenceto himself in my dreams may be willing to grant me the right of freedomof thought—in my dream-life, if nowhere else.xxiv Preface to the First Edition9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxivPreface to the Second Edition
Ifwithin ten years of the publication of this book (which is very far from
being an easy one to read) a second edition is called for, this is not due to
the interest taken in it by the professional circles to whom my original pref-ace was addressed. My psychiatric colleagues seem to have taken no troubleto overcome the initial bewilderment created by my new approach todreams. The professional philosophers have become accustomed to polish-ing off the problems of dream-life (which they treat as a mere appendix toconscious states) in a few sentences—and usually in the same ones; andthey have evidently failed to notice that we have something here fromwhich a number of inferences can be drawn that are bound to transformour psychological theories. The attitude adopted by reviewers in the scien-tiﬁc periodicals could only lead one to suppose that my work was doomedto be sunk into complete silence; while the small group or gallant support-ers, who practise medical psycho-analysis under my guidance and who follow my example in interpreting dreams and make use of their interpre-tations in treating neurotics, would never have exhausted the ﬁrst editionof the book. Thus it is that I feel indebted to a wider circle of educated andcurious-minded readers, whose interest has led me to take up once more af-ter nine years this difﬁcult, but in many respects fundamental, work.
I am glad to say that I have found little to change in it. Here and there
I have inserted some new material, added some fresh points of detail de-rived from my increased experience, and at some few points recast mystatements. But the essence of what I have written about dreams and theirinterpretation, as well as about the psychological theorems to be deducedfrom them—all this remains unaltered: subjectively at all events, it hasstood the test of time. Anyone who is acquainted with my other writings(on the aetiology and mechanism of the psycho-neuroses) will know thatI have never put forward inconclusive opinions as though they were estab-lished facts, and that I have always sought to modify my statements so that
xxv9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxvthey may keep in step with my advancing knowledge. In the sphere of my
dream-life I have been able to leave my original assertions unchanged.During the long years in which I have been working at the problems of theneuroses I have often been in doubt and sometimes been shaken in myconvictions. At such times it has always been the Interpretation of Dreams
that has given me back my certainty. It is thus a sure instinct which has ledmy many scientiﬁc opponents to refuse to follow me more especially in myresearches upon dreams.
An equal durability and power to withstand any far-reaching alter-
ations during the process of revision has been shown by the material of
the book, consisting as it does of dreams of my own which have for themost part been overtaken or made valueless by the march of events andby which I illustrated the rules of dream-interpretation. For this book hasa further subjective signiﬁcance for me personally—a signiﬁcance whichI only grasped after I had completed it. It was, I found, a portion of myown self-analysis, my reaction to my father’s death—that is to say, to themost important event, the most poignant loss, of a man’s life. Having dis-covered that this was so, I felt unable to obliterate the traces of the expe-rience.
1To my readers, however, it will be a matter of indifference upon
what particular material they learn to appreciate the importance ofdreams and how to interpret them.
Wherever I have found it impossible to incorporate some essential ad-
dition into the original context, I have indicated its more recent date byenclosing it in square brackets.
2
Berchtesgaden , Summer 1908xxvi Preface to the Second Edition
1 [Freud’s father had died in 1896. Some account of his feelings at the time will
be found in his letter to Fliess of November 2, 1896. (Freud 1950 a, Letter 50.)]
2 [Footnote added 1914.] In later editions [from the fourth onwards] these were
omitted.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxviPreface to the Third Edition
Nine years elapsed between the ﬁrst and second editions of this book,
but after scarcely more than a single year a third edition has become nec-
essary. This new turn of events may please me; but just as formerly I wasunwilling to regard the neglect of my book by readers as evidence of itsworthlessness, so I cannot claim that the interest which is now beingtaken in it is a proof of its excellence.
Even the Interpretation of Dreams has not been left untouched by the
advance of scientiﬁc knowledge. When I wrote it in 1899, my theory ofsexuality was not yet in existence and the analysis of the more complicatedforms of psycho-neurosis was only just beginning. It was my hope thatdream-interpretation would help to make possible the psychological analy-sis of neuroses; since then a deeper understanding of neuroses has reactedin turn upon our view of dreams. The theory of dream- interpretation hasitself developed further in a direction on which insufﬁcient stress had beenlaid in the ﬁrst edition of this book. My own experience, as well as theworks of Wilhelm Stekel and others, have since taught me to form a truerestimate of the extent and importance of symbolism in dreams (or ratherin unconscious thinking). Thus in the course of these years much has ac-cumulated which demands attention. I have endeavoured to take these in-novations into account by making numerous interpolations in the text andby additional footnotes. If these additions threaten at times to burst thewhole framework of the book or if I have not everywhere succeeded inbringing the original text up to the level of our present knowledge, I mustask the reader’s indulgence for these deﬁciencies: they are the results andsigns of the present increasingly rapid development of our science. I mayeven venture to prophesy in what other directions later editions of thisbook—if any should be needed—will differ from the present one. Theywill have on the one hand to afford closer contact with the copious mate-rial presented in imaginative writing, in myths, in linguistic usage and in
xxvii9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxviifolklore; while on the other hand they will have to deal in greater detail
than has here been possible with the relations of dreams to neuroses andmental diseases.
Herr Otto Rank has given me valuable assistance in selecting the ad-
ditional matter and has been entirely responsible for correcting theproofs. I owe my thanks to him and to many others for their contribu-tions and corrections.
Vienna , Spring 1911
Preface to the Fourth Edition
Last year (1913) Dr. A. A. Brill of New York produced an English transla-
tion of this book ( The Interpretation of Dreams , G. Allen & Co., London).
On this occasion Dr. Otto Rank has not only corrected the proofs but
has also contributed two self-contained chapters to the text—the appen-dices to Chapter VI.
Vienna , June 1914xxviii Preface to the Fourth Edition9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxviiiPreface to the Fifth Edition
Interest in the Interpretation of Dreams has not ﬂagged even during the
World War, and while it is still in progress a new edition has become nec-
essary. It has not been possible, however, to notice fully publications since1914; neither Dr. Rank nor I have any knowledge of foreign works sincethat date.
A Hungarian translation, prepared by Dr. Hollós and Dr. Ferenczi, is
on the point of appearing. In 1916–17 my Introductory Lectures on Psycho-
Analysis were published in Vienna by Hugo Heller. The central section of
these, comprising eleven lectures, is devoted to an account of dreamswhich aims at being more elementary and at being in closer contact withthe theory of the neuroses than the present work. On the whole it is inthe nature of an epitome of the Interpretation of Dreams , though at certain
points it enters into greater detail.
I have not been able to bring myself to embark upon any fundamental
revision of this book, which might bring it up to the level of our presentpsycho-analytic views but would on the other hand destroy its historiccharacter. I think, however, that after an existence of nearly twenty yearsit has accomplished its task.
Budapest-Steinbruch , July 1918
Preface to the Sixth Edition
Owing to the difﬁculties in which the book trade is placed at present, this
new edition has long been in demand, and the preceding edition has, forthe ﬁrst time, been reprinted without any alterations. Only the bibliography
xxix9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxixat the end of the volume has been completed and brought up to date by Dr.
Otto Rank.
Thus my assumption that after an existence of nearly twenty years this
book had accomplished its task has not been conﬁrmed. On the contrary,I might say that it has a new task to perform. If its earlier function was tooffer some information on the nature of dreams, now it has the no lessimportant duty of dealing with the obstinate misunderstandings to whichthat information is subject.
Vienna, April 1921xxx Preface to the Sixth Edition9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxxPreface to the Eighth Edition
During the interval between the publication of the last (seventh) edition
of this book in 1922 and the present one, my Gesammelte Schriften [Col-
lected Writings] have been issued in Vienna by the Internationaler Psycho-
analytischer Verlag. The second volume of that collection consists of anexact reprint of the ﬁrst edition of the Interpretation of Dreams , while the
third volume contains all the additions that have since been made to it.The translations of the book which have appeared during the same intervalare based upon the usual, single-volume, form of the work: a French oneby I. Meyerson published under the title of La science des rêves in the
 ‘Bibliothèque de Philosophie Contemporaine’ in 1926; a Swedish one byJohn Landquist, Drömtydning (1927); and a Spanish one by Luis López-
 Ballesteros y de Torres [1922], which occupies Volumes VI and VII of theObras Completas. The Hungarian translation, which I thought was on the
point of completion as long ago as in 1918, has even now not appeared.
1
In the present revised edition of the work I have again treated it essen-
tially as an historic document and I have only made such alterations in itas were suggested by the clariﬁcation and deepening of my own opinions.In accordance with this, I have ﬁnally given up the idea of including a listof works on the problems of dreams published since the book’s ﬁrst ap-pearance, and that section has now been dropped. The two essays whichOtto Rank contributed to earlier editions, on ‘Dreams and Creative Writ-ing’ and ‘Dreams and Myths’, have also been omitted. [See p. xx.]
Vienna , December 1929
xxxi1 [It was published in 1934.—During Freud’s lifetime, in addition to the transla-
tions mentioned in these prefaces, a Russian version appeared in 1913, a Japa-
nese one in 1930 and a Czech one in 1938.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxxiPreface to the Third (Revised) English Edition1
In1909 G. Stanley Hall invited me to Clark University, in Worcester, to
give the ﬁrst lectures on psycho-analysis. In the same year Dr. Brill pub-
lished the ﬁrst of his translations of my writings, which were soon fol-lowed by further ones. If psycho-analysis now plays a role in Americanintellectual life, or if it does so in the future, a large part of this result willhave to be attributed to this and other activities of Dr. Brill’s.
His ﬁrst translation of The Interpretation of Dreams appeared in 1913.
Since then much has taken place in the world, and much has beenchanged in our views about the neuroses. This book, with the new con-tribution to psychology which surprised the world when it was published(1900), remains essentially unaltered. It contains, even according to mypresent-day judgment, the most valuable of all the discoveries it has beenmy good fortune to make. Insight such as this falls to one’s lot but oncein a lifetime.
FREUD
Vienna , March 15, 1931
xxxii1 [This is not included in the German editions and no German text is extant. It is
here reprinted exactly from the 1932 English edition.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page xxxiiTHE INTERPRETATION
OF DREAMS9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 339780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 34CHAPTER I
THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE DEALING WITH
THE PROBLEMS OF DREAMS1
Inthe pages that follow I shall bring forward proof that there is a psycho-
logical technique which makes it possible to interpret dreams, and that,
if that procedure is employed, every dream reveals itself as a psychicalstructure which has a meaning and which can be inserted at an assignablepoint in the mental activities of waking life. I shall further endeavour toelucidate the processes to which the strangeness and obscurity of dreamsare due and to deduce from those processes the nature of the psychicalforces by whose concurrent or mutually opposing action dreams are gen-erated. Having gone thus far, my description will break off, for it willhave reached a point at which the problem of dreams merges into morecomprehensive problems, the solution of which must be approachedupon the basis of material of another kind.
I shall give by way of preface a review of the work done by earlier writ-
ers on the subject as well as of the present position of the problems ofdreams in the world of science, since in the course of my discussion I shallnot often have occasion to revert to those topics. For, in spite of manythousands of years of effort, the scientiﬁc understanding of dreams hasmade very little advance—a fact so generally admitted in the literature thatit seems unnecessary to quote instances in support of it. In these writings,
351 [Footnote added in second to seventh editions:] Up to the date of the ﬁrst publi-
cation of this book (1900).9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 35of which a list appears at the end of my work, many stimulating observa-
tions are to be found and a quantity of interesting material bearing uponour theme, but little or nothing that touches upon the essential nature ofdreams or that offers a ﬁnal solution of any of their enigmas. And still less,of course, has passed into the knowledge of educated laymen.
It may be asked
1what view was taken of dreams in prehistoric times
by primitive races of men and what effect dreams may have had upon theformation of their conceptions of the world and of the soul; and this is asubject of such great interest that it is only with much reluctance that Irefrain from dealing with it in this connection. I must refer my readers tothe standard works of Sir John Lubbock, Herbert Spencer, E. B. Tylorand others, and I will only add that we shall not be able to appreciate thewide range of these problems and speculations until we have dealt withthe task that lies before us here—the interpretation of dreams.
The prehistoric view of dreams is no doubt echoed in the attitude
adopted towards dreams by the peoples of classical antiquity.
2They took
it as axiomatic that dreams were connected with the world of super -human beings in whom they believed and that they were revelations fromgods and daemons. There could be no question, moreover, that for thedreamer dreams had an important purpose, which was as a rule to foretellthe future. The extraordinary variety in the content of dreams and in theimpression they produced made it difﬁcult, however, to have any uniformview of them and made it necessary to classify dreams into numerousgroups and subdivisions according to their importance and trustworthi-ness. The position adopted towards dreams by individual philosophers inantiquity was naturally dependent to some extent upon their attitude to-wards divination in general.
In the two works of Aristotle which deal with dreams, they have already
become a subject for psychological study. We are told that dreams are notsent by the gods and are not of a divine character, but that they are ‘dae-monic,’ since nature is ‘daemonic’ and not divine. Dreams, that is, do notarise from supernatural manifestations but follow the laws of the human36 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1914.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] What follows is based on Büchsen-schütz’s scholarly
study (1868).9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 36spirit, though the latter, it is true, is akin to the divine. Dreams are deﬁned
as the mental activity of the sleeper in so far as he is asleep.1
Aristotle was aware of some of the characteristics of dream-life. He
knew, for instance, that dreams give a magniﬁed construction to smallstimuli arising during sleep. ‘Men think that they are walking through ﬁreand are tremendously hot, when there is only a slight heating about cer-tain parts.’
2And from this circumstance he draws the conclusion that
dreams may very well betray to a physician the ﬁrst signs of some bodilychange which has not been observed in waking.
3
Before the time of Aristotle, as we know, the ancients regarded dreams
not as a product of the dreaming mind but as something introduced by adivine agency; and already the two opposing currents, which we shall ﬁndinﬂuencing opinions of dream-life at every period of history, were makingthemselves felt. The distinction was drawn between truthful and valuabledreams, sent to the sleeper to warn him or foretell the future, and vain,deceitful and worthless dreams, whose purpose it was to mislead or de-stroy him.
Gruppe (1906, 2,930)
4quotes a classiﬁcation of dreams on these lines
made by Macrobius and Artemidorus [of Daldis (see p. 130 n. 2)]: ‘Dreamswere divided into two classes. One class was supposed to be inﬂuenced by thepresent or past, but to have no future signiﬁcance. It included the  
’εν`υπνια37 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [De divinatione per somnum, II (Trans. , 1935, 377) and De somnus , III ( Trans. ,
1935, 365).—In the ﬁrst edition (1900) this paragraph ran: ‘The ﬁrst work in
which dreams were treated as a subject for psychological study seems to be thatof Aristotle ( On Dreams and Their Interpretation ). Aristotle declares that dreams
are of a “daemonic” but not of a “divine” nature; no doubt this distinction hassome great signiﬁcance if we knew how to translate it correctly.’ The next para-graph ended with the sentence: ‘My own insufﬁcient knowledge and my lack ofspecialist assistance prevent my entering more deeply into Aristotle’s treatise.’These passages were altered into their present form in 1914; and a note inGesammelte Schriften, 3 (1925), 4, points out that in fact Aristotle wrote not onebut two works on the subject.]
2 [De divinatione , I (Trans. , 1935, 375)].
3 [Footnote added 1914:] The Greek physician Hippocrates deals with the relation
of dreams to illnesses in one of the chapters of his famous work [Ancient Medi-cine, X (Trans. , 1923, 31). See also Regimen , IV, 88, passim. (Trans. , 1931, 425,
etc.)].
4 [This paragraph was added as a footnote in 1911 and included in the text in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 37or insomnia , which gave a direct representation of a given idea or of its
 opposite—e.g. of hunger or of its satiation—and the ϕαντ /H11032ασματα , which
lent a fantastic extension to the given idea—e.g. the nightmare or ephialtes .
The other class, on the contrary, was supposed to determine the future. It in-
cluded (1) direct prophecies received in a dream (the χρηματισμ óςor orac-
ulum), (2) previsions of some future event (the  ’óραμα or visio) and (3)
symbolic dreams, which needed interpretation (the  ’óνειρος or somnium).
This theory persisted for many centuries.’
This variation in the value that was to be assigned to dreams1was
closely related to the problem of ‘interpreting’ them. Important conse-quences were in general to be expected from dreams. But dreams were notall immediately comprehensible and it was impossible to tell whether aparticular unintelligible dream might not be making some important an-nouncement. This provided an incentive for elaborating a method bywhich the unintelligible content of a dream might be replaced by one thatwas comprehensible and signiﬁcant. In the later years of antiquity Artemi-dorus of Daldis was regarded as the greatest authority on the interpretationof dreams, and the survival of his exhaustive work [ Oneirocritica ] must
compensate us for the loss of the other writings on the same subject.
2
The pre-scientiﬁc view of dreams adopted by the peoples of antiquity
was certainly in complete harmony with their view of the universe in gen-eral, which led them to project into the external world as though theywere realities things which in fact enjoyed reality only within their ownminds. Moreover, their view of dreams took into account the principalimpression produced upon the waking mind in the morning by what isleft of a dream in the memory: an impression of something alien, arisingfrom another world and contrasting with the remaining contents of the38 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] For the further history of dream-interpretation in the
Middle Ages see Diepgen (1912) and the monographs of Förster (1910 and
1911), Gotthard (1912), etc. Dream-interpretation among the Jews has beendiscussed by Almoli (1848), Amram (1901), and Löwinger (1908); also, quiterecently and taking account of psychoanalytic ﬁndings, by Lauer (1913). Infor-mation upon dream-interpretation among the Arabs has been given by Drexl(1909), Schwarz (1913) and the missionary Tﬁnkdji (1913); among the Japa-nese by Miura (1906) and Iwaya (1902); among the Chinese by Secker (1909–10); and among the people of India by Negelein (1912).9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 38mind. Incidentally, it would be a mistake to suppose that the theory of
the supernatural origin of dreams is without its supporters in our owndays. We may leave on one side pietistic and mystical writers, who, in-deed, are perfectly justiﬁed in remaining in occupation of what is left ofthe once wide domain of the supernatural so long as that ﬁeld is not con-quered by scientiﬁc explanation. But apart from them, one comes acrossclear-headed men, without any extravagant ideas, who seek to supporttheir religious faith in the existence and activity of superhuman spiritualforces precisely by the inexplicable nature of the phenomena of dreaming.(Cf. Haffner, 1887.) The high esteem in which dream-life is held by someschools of philosophy (by the followers of Schelling,
1for instance) is
clearly an echo of the divine nature of dreams which was undisputed inantiquity. Nor are discussions of the premonitory character of dreams andtheir power to foretell the future at an end. For attempts at giving a psy-chological explanation have been inadequate to cover the material col-lected, however decidedly the sympathies of those of a scientiﬁc cast ofmind may incline against accepting any such beliefs.
It is difﬁcult to write a history of the scientiﬁc study of the problems
of dreams because, however valuable that study may have been at a fewpoints, no line of advance in any particular direction can be traced. Nofoundation has been laid of secure ﬁndings upon which a later investiga-tor might build; but each new writer examines the same problems afreshand begins again, as it were, from the beginning. If I attempted to takethose who have written on the question in chronological order and togive a summary of their views upon the problems of dreams, I shouldhave to abandon any hope of giving a comprehensive general picture ofthe present state of knowledge of the subject. I have therefore chosen toframe my account according to topics rather than authors and, as I raiseeach dream-problem in turn, I shall bring forward whatever material theliterature contains for its solution.39 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [The chief exponent of the pantheistic ‘Philosophy of Nature,’ popular in Ger-
many during the early part of the nineteenth century.—Freud often recurred to
the question of the occult signiﬁcance of dreams. Cf. Freud 1922 a, 1925i (Part
3) and 1933a (Lecture 30). An allegedly premonitory dream is discussed in
Freud 1941 c[1899], printed as an Appendix to this work, p. 617. See also
pp. 93 and 615 below.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 39Since, however, it has been impossible for me to cover the whole of the
literature of the subject, widely scattered as it is and trenching upon many
other ﬁelds, I must ask my readers to be satisﬁed so long as no fundamen-tal fact and no important point of view is overlooked in my description.
Until recently most writers on the subject have felt obliged to treat
sleep and dreams as a single topic, and as a rule they have dealt in addi-tion with analogous conditions on the fringe of pathology, and dream-like states, such as hallucinations, visions and so on. The latest works, onthe contrary, show a preference for a restricted theme and take as theirsubject, perhaps, some isolated question in the ﬁeld of dream-life. Ishould be glad to see in this change of attitude the expression of a con-viction that in such obscure matters it will only be possible to arrive at ex-planations and agreed results by a series of detailed investigations. A pieceof detailed research of that kind, predominantly psychological in charac-ter, is all I have to offer in these pages. I have had little occasion to dealwith the problem of sleep, for that is essentially a problem of physiology,even though one of the characteristics of the state of sleep must be that itbrings about modiﬁcations in the conditions of functioning of the mentalapparatus. The literature on the subject of sleep is accordingly disregardedin what follows.
The questions raised by a scientiﬁc enquiry into the phenomena of
dreams as such may be grouped under the headings which follow, thougha certain amount of overlapping cannot be avoided.40 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 40(A) 
THE RELATION OF DREAMS TO WAKING LIFE
The unsophisticated waking judgement of someone who has just
woken from sleep assumes that his dreams, even if they did not them-
selves come from another world, had at all events carried him off into an-other world. The old physiologist Burdach (1838, 499), to whom we owea careful and shrewd account of the phenomena of dreams, has given ex-pression to this conviction in a much-quoted passage: ‘In dreams, dailylife, with its labours and pleasures, its joys and pains, is never repeated.On the contrary, dreams have as their very aim to free us from it. Evenwhen our whole mind has been ﬁlled with something, when we are tornby some deep sorrow or when all our intellectual power is absorbed insome problem, a dream will do no more than enter into the tone of ourmood and represent reality in symbols.’ I. H. Fichte (1864, 1, 541), inthe same sense, actually speaks of ‘complementary dreams’ and describesthem as one of the secret benefactions of the self-healing nature of thespirit.
1Strümpell (1877, 16) writes to similar effect in his study on the
nature and origin of dreams—a work which is widely and deservedly heldin high esteem: ‘A man who dreams is removed from the world of wakingconsciousness.’ So too (ibid., 17): ‘In dreams our memory of the orderedcontents of waking consciousness and of its normal behaviour is as goodas completely lost.’ And again (ibid., 19) he writes that ‘the mind is cutoff in dreams, almost without memory, from the ordinary content and af-fairs of waking life.’
The preponderant majority of writers, however, take a contrary view
of the relation of dreams to waking life. Thus Haffner (1887, 245): ‘Inthe ﬁrst place, dreams carry on waking life. Our dreams regularly attachthemselves to the ideas that have been in our consciousness shortly be-fore. Accurate observation will almost always ﬁnd a thread which con-nects a dream with the experiences of the previous day.’ Weygandt (1893,41 A. Dreams and Waking Life
1 [This sentence was added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 416) speciﬁcally contradicts Burdach’s statement which I have just quoted:
‘For it may often, and apparently in the majority of dreams, be observedthat they actually lead us back to ordinary life instead of freeing us fromit.’ Maury (1878, 51) advances a concise formula: ‘Nous rêvons de ce quenous avons vu, dit, désiré ou fait’;
1while Jessen, in his book on psychol-
ogy (1855, 530), remarks at somewhat greater length: ‘The content of adream is invariably more or less determined by the individual personalityof the dreamer, by his age, sex, class, standard of education and habitualway of living, and by the events and experiences of his whole previouslife.’
The most uncompromising attitude on this question
2is adopted by
J. G. E. Maass, the philosopher (1805, [1, 168 and 173]), quoted by Win-terstein (1912): ‘Experience conﬁrms our view that we dream most fre-quently of the things on which our warmest passions are centred. Andthis shows that our passions must have an inﬂuence on the production ofour dreams. The ambitious man dreams of the laurels he has won (orimagines he has won) or of those he has still to win; while the lover is bus-ied in his dreams with the object of his sweet hopes. . . . All the sensualdesires and repulsions that slumber in the heart can, if anything sets themin motion, cause a dream to arise from the ideas that are associated withthem or cause those ideas to intervene in a dream that is already present.’
The same view was taken in antiquity on the dependence of the con-
tent of dreams upon waking life. Radestock (1879, 134) tells us how be-fore Xerxes started on his expedition against Greece, he was given soundadvice of a discouraging kind but was always urged on again by hisdreams; whereupon Artabanus, the sensible old Persian interpreter ofdreams, observed to him pertinently that as a rule dream-pictures containwhat the waking man already thinks.
Lucretius’ didactic poem De rerum natura contains the following pas-
sage (IV, 962):
Et quo quisque fere studio devinctus adhaeret aut quibus inrebus multum sumus ante morati atque in ea ratione fuitcontenta magis mens, in somnis eadem plerumque videmur42 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [‘We dream of what we have seen, said, desired or done.’]
2 [This paragraph was added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 42cbire; causidici causas agere et componere leges, indupera-
tores pugnare ac proelia obire . . . 1
Cicero ( De divinatione , II, lxvii, 140) writes to exactly the same effect as
Maury so many years later: ‘Maximeque reliquiae rerum earum moventurin animis et agitantur de quibus vigilantes aut cogitavimus aut egimus.’
2
The contradiction between these two views upon the relation between
dream-life and waking life seems in fact insoluble. It is therefore relevantat this point to recall the discussion of the subject by Hildebrandt (1875,8 ff.), who believes that it is impossible to describe the characteristics ofdreams at all except by means of ‘a series of [three] contrasts which seemto sharpen into contradictions.’ The ﬁrst of these contrasts,’ he writes, ‘isafforded on the one hand by the completeness with which dreams are se-cluded and separated from real and actual life and on the other hand bytheir constant encroachment upon each other and their constant mutualdependence. A dream is something completely severed from the realityexperienced in waking life, something, as one might say, with an hermet-ically sealed existence of its own, and separated from real life by an im-passable gulf. It sets us free from reality, extinguishes our normal memoryof it and places us in another world and in a quite other life-story whichin essentials has nothing to do with our real one. . . . ’ Hildebrandt goeson to show how when we fall asleep our whole being with all its forms ofexistence ‘disappears, as it were, through an invisible trap-door.’ Then,perhaps, the dreamer may make a sea-voyage to St. Helena in order to of-fer Napoleon, who is a prisoner there, a choice bargain in Moselle wines.He is received most affably by the ex-Emperor and feels almost sorrywhen he wakes and the interesting illusion is destroyed. But let us com-pare the situation in the dream, proceeds Hildebrandt, with reality. The43 A. Dreams and Waking Life
1 [‘And whatever be the pursuit to which one clings with devotion, whatever the
things on which we have been occupied much in the past, the mind being thus
more intent upon that pursuit, it is generally the same things that we seem toencounter in dreams: pleaders to plead their cause and collate laws, generals tocontend and engage battle . . . ’ (Rouse’s translation in the Loeb Classical Li-brary, 1924, 317.)]
2 [‘Then especially do the remnants of our waking thoughts and deeds move and
stir within the soul.’ (Falconer’s translation in the Loeb Classical Library, 1922,527.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 43dreamer has never been a wine-merchant and has never wished to be. He
has never gone on a sea-voyage, and if he did, St. Helena would be thelast place he would choose to go to. He nourishes no sympathetic feelingswhatever towards Napoleon, but on the contrary a ﬁerce patriotic hatred.And, on top of all the rest, the dreamer was not even born when Napo-leon died on the island; so that to have any personal relations with himwas beyond the bounds of possibility. Thus the dream-experience appearsas something alien inserted between two sections of life which are per-fectly continuous and consistent with each other.
‘And yet,’ continues Hildebrandt [ibid., 10], ‘What appears to be the
contrary of this is equally true and correct. In spite of everything, themost intimate relationship goes hand in hand, I believe, with the seclu-sion and separation. We may even go so far as to say that whatever dreamsmay offer, they derive their material from reality and from the intellectuallife that revolves around that reality. . . . Whatever strange results theymay achieve, they can never in fact get free from the real world; and theirmost sublime as well as their most ridiculous structures must always bor-row their basic material either from what has passed before our eyes in theworld of the senses or from what has already found a place somewhere inthe course of our waking thoughts—in other words from what we havealready experienced either externally or internally.’
(B) 
THE MATERIAL OF DREAMS—MEMORY IN DREAMS
All the material making up the content of a dream is in some way de-
rived from experience, that is to say, has been reproduced or rememberedin the dream—so much at least we may regard as an undisputed fact. Butit would be a mistake to suppose that a connection of this kind betweenthe content of a dream and reality is bound to come to light easily, as animmediate result of comparing them. The connection requires, on thecontrary, to be looked for diligently, and in a whole quantity of cases itmay long remain hidden. The reason for this lies in a number of peculi-arities which are exhibited by the faculty of memory in dreams andwhich, though generally remarked upon, have hitherto resisted explana-tion. It will be worth while to examine these characteristics more closely.44 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 44It may happen that a piece of material occurs in the content of a
dream which in the waking state we do not recognize as forming a part
of our knowledge or experience. We remember, of course, having dreamtthe thing in question, but we cannot remember whether or when we ex-perienced it in real life. We are thus left in doubt as to the source whichhas been drawn upon by the dream and are tempted to believe thatdreams have a power of independent production. Then at last, often aftera long interval, some fresh experience recalls the lost memory of the otherevent and at the same time reveals the source of the dream. We are thusdriven to admit that in the dream we knew and remembered somethingwhich was beyond the reach of our waking memory.
1
A particularly striking example of this is given by Delboeuf [1885,
107 ff.] from his own experience. He saw in a dream the courtyard of hishouse covered with snow and found two small lizards half-frozen andburied under it. Being an animal-lover, he picked them up, warmed them,and carried them back to the little hole in the masonry where they be-longed. He further gave them a few leaves of a small fern which grew onthe wall and of which, as he knew, they were very fond. In the dream heknew the name of the plant: Asplenium ruta muralis. The dream pro-
ceeded and, after a digression, came back to the lizards. Delboeuf then sawto his astonishment two new ones which were busy on the remains of thefern. He then looked round him and saw a ﬁfth and then a sixth lizardmaking their way to the hole in the wall, until the whole roadway wasﬁlled with a procession of lizards, all moving in the same direction . . . andso on.
When he was awake, Delboeuf knew the Latin names of very few
plants and an Asplenium was not among them. To his great surprise he
was able to conﬁrm the fact that a fern of this name actually exists. Itscorrect name is Asplenium ruta muraria , which had been slightly distorted
in the dream. It was hardly possible that this could be a coincidence; andit remained a mystery to Delboeuf how he had acquired his knowledge ofthe name ‘ Asplenium ’ in his dream.
The dream occurred in 1862. Sixteen years later, while the philosopher
was on a visit to one of his friends, he saw a little album of pressed ﬂowers ofthe sort that are sold to foreigners as mementos in some parts of Switzer land.45 B. Memory in Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Vaschide (1911) remarks that it has often been observed
that in dreams people speak foreign languages more ﬂuently and correctly than
in waking life.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 45A recollection began to dawn on him—he opened the herbarium, found the
Asplenium of his dream and saw its Latin name written underneath it in his
own handwriting. The facts could now be established. In 1860 (two yearsbefore the lizard dream) a sister of this same friend had visited Delboeuf onher honeymoon. She had with her the album, which was to be a gift to herbrother, and Delboeuf took the trouble to write its Latin name under eachdried plant, at the dictation of a botanist.
Good luck, which made this example so well worth recording, enabled
Delboeuf to trace yet another part of the content of the dream to its for-gotten source. One day in 1877 he happened to take up an old volumeof an illustrated periodical and in it he found a picture of the whole pro-cession of lizards which he had dreamed of in 1862. The volume wasdated 1861 and Delboeuf remembered having been a subscriber to thepaper from its ﬁrst number.
The fact that dreams have at their command memories which are in-
accessible in waking life is so remarkable and of such theoretical impor-tance that I should like to draw still more attention to it by relating somefurther ‘hypermnesic’ dreams. Maury [1878, 142] tells us how for sometime the word ‘Mussidan’ kept coming into his head during the day. Heknew nothing about it except that it was the name of a town in France.One night he dreamt that he was talking to someone who told him hecame from Mussidan, and who, on being asked where that was, repliedthat it was a small town in the Department of Dordogne. When he wokeup, Maury had no belief in the information given him in the dream; helearnt from a gazetteer, however, that it was perfectly correct. In this casethe fact of the dream’s superior knowledge was conﬁrmed, but the forgot-ten source of that knowledge was not discovered.
Jessen (1855, 551) reports a very similar event in a dream dating from
remoter times: ‘To this class belongs among others a dream of the elderScaliger (quoted by Hennings, 1784, 300) who wrote a poem in praise ofthe famous men of Verona. A man who called himself Brugnolus ap-peared to him in a dream and complained that he had been overlooked.Although Scaliger could not remember having ever heard of him, hewrote some verses on him. His son learnt later in Verona that someonenamed Brugnolus had in fact been celebrated there as a critic.’
The Marquis d’Hervey de St. Denys [1867, 305],
1quoted by Vaschide
(1911, 232 f.), describes a hypermnesic dream which has a special pecu-46 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1[This paragraph and the next were added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 46liarity, for it was followed by another dream which completed the recog-
nition of what was at ﬁrst an unidentiﬁed memory: ‘I once dreamt of ayoung woman with golden hair, whom I saw talking to my sister whileshowing her some embroidery. She seemed very familiar to me in thedream and I thought I had seen her very often before. After I woke up, Istill had her face very clearly before me but I was totally unable to recog-nize it. I then went to sleep once more and the dream-picture was re-peated. . . . But in this second dream I spoke to the fair-haired lady andasked her if I had not had the pleasure of meeting her before somewhere.“Of course,” she replied, “don’t you remember the plage at Pornic?” I im-mediately woke up again and I was then able to recollect clearly all thedetails associated with the attractive vision in the dream.’
The same author [ibid., 306] (quoted again by Vaschide, ibid., 233–4)
tells how a musician of his acquaintance once heard in a dream a tunewhich seemed to him entirely new. It was not until several years later thathe found the same tune in an old collected volume of musical pieces,though he still could not remember ever having looked through it before.
I understand that Myers [1892] has published a whole collection of
hypermnesic dreams of this kind in the Proceedings of the Society for Psy-
chical Research; but these are unluckily inaccessible to me.
No one who occupies himself with dreams can, I believe, fail to discover
that it is a very common event for a dream to give evidence of knowledgeand memories which the waking subject is unaware of possessing. In mypsycho-analytic work with nervous patients, of which I shall speak later, Iam in a position several times a week to prove to patients from their dreamsthat they are really quite familiar with quotations, obscene words and so on,and make use of them in their dreams, though they have forgotten them intheir waking life. I will add one more innocent case of hypermnesia in adream, because of the great ease with which it was possible to trace thesource of the knowledge that was accessible only in the dream.
One of my patients dreamt in the course of a fairly lengthy dream that
he had ordered a ‘ Kontuszówka ’ while he was in a café. After telling me
this, he asked me what a ‘Kontuszówka’ was, as he had never heard thename. I was able to tell him in reply that it was a Polish liqueur, and thathe could not have invented the name as it had long been familiar to mefrom advertisements on the hoardings. At ﬁrst he would not believe me;but some days later, after making his dream come true in a café, he noticedthe name on a hoarding at a street corner which he must have gone past atleast twice a day for several months.47 B. Memory in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 47I have noticed myself1from my own dreams how much it is a matter
of chance whether one discovers the source of particular elements of a
dream. Thus, for several years before completing this book, I was pursuedby the picture of a church tower of very simple design, which I could notremember ever having seen. Then I suddenly recognized it, with absolutecertainty, at a small station on the line between Salzburg and Reichenhall.That was during the second half of the eighteen-nineties and I had trav-elled over the line for the ﬁrst time in 1886. During later years, when Iwas already deeply absorbed in the study of dreams, the frequent recur-rence in my dreams of the picture of a particular unusual-looking placebecame a positive nuisance to me. In a speciﬁc spatial relation to myself,on my left-hand side, I saw a dark space out of which there glimmered anumber of grotesque sandstone ﬁgures. A faint recollection, which I wasunwilling to credit, told me it was the entrance to a beer-cellar. But Ifailed to discover either the meaning of the dream-picture or its origin. In1907 I happened to be in Padua, which, to my regret, I had not been ableto visit since 1895. My ﬁrst visit to that lovely University town had beena disappointment, as I had not been able to see Giotto’s frescoes in theMadonna dell’ Arena. I had turned back halfway along the street leadingthere, on being told that the chapel was closed on that particular day. Onmy second visit, twelve years later, I decided to make up for this and theﬁrst thing I did was to set off towards the Arena chapel. In the street lead-ing to it, on my left-hand side as I walked along and in all probability atthe point at which I had turned back in 1895, I came upon the place Ihad seen so often in my dreams, with the sandstone ﬁgures that formedpart of it. It was in fact the entrance to the garden of a restaurant.
One of the sources from which dreams derive material for
 reproduction—material which is in part neither remembered nor used inthe activities of waking thought—is childhood experience. I will quoteonly a few of the authors who have noticed and stressed this fact.
Hildebrandt (1875, 23): ‘I have already expressly admitted that dreams
sometimes bring back to our minds, with a wonderful power of reproduc-tion, very remote and even forgotten events from our earliest years.’
Strümpell (1877, 40): ‘The position is even more remarkable when we
observe how dreams sometimes bring to light, as it were, from beneath48 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [This paragraph was added in 1909.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 48the deepest piles of débris under which the earliest experiences of youth
are buried in later times, pictures of particular localities, things or people,completely intact and with all their original freshness. This is not limitedto experiences which created a lively impression when they occurred orenjoy a high degree of psychical importance and return later in a dreamas genuine recollections at which waking consciousness will rejoice. Onthe contrary, the depths of memory in dreams also include pictures ofpeople, things, localities and events dating from the earliest times, whicheither never possessed any psychical importance or more than a slight degree of vividness, or which have long since lost what they may havepossessed of either, and which consequently seem completely alien andunknown alike to the dreaming and waking mind till their earlier originhas been discovered.’
Volkelt (1875, 119): ‘It is especially remarkable how readily memories
of childhood and youth make their way into dreams. Dreams are contin-ually reminding us of things which we have ceased to think of and whichhave long ceased to be important to us.’
Since dreams have material from childhood at their command, and
since, as we all know, that material is for the most part blotted out by gapsin our conscious faculty of memory, these circumstances give rise to inter-esting hypermnesic dreams, of which I will once more give a few  examples.
Maury (1878, 92) relates how when he was a child he used often to go
from Meaux, which was his birthplace, to the neighbouring village ofT rilport, where his father was superintending the building of a bridge.One night in a dream he found himself in T rilport and was once moreplaying in the village street. A man came up to him who was wearing asort of uniform. Maury asked him his name and he replied that he wascalled C. and was a watchman at the bridge. Maury awoke feeling scepti-cal as to the correctness of the memory, and asked an old maid-servant,who had been with him since his childhood, whether she could remem-ber a man of that name. ‘Why, yes,’ was the reply, ‘he was the watchmanat the bridge when your father was building it.’
Maury (ibid., 143–4) gives another equally well corroborated example
of the accuracy of a memory of childhood emerging in a dream. It wasdreamt by a Monsieur F ., who as a child had lived at Montbrison. T wenty-ﬁve years after leaving it, he decided to revisit his home and some friendsof the family whom he had not since met. During the night before his de-parture he dreamt that he was already at Montbrison and, near the town,49 B. Memory in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 49met a gentleman whom he did not know by sight but who told him he
was Monsieur T., a friend of his father’s. The dreamer was aware thatwhen he was a child he had known someone of that name, but in his wak-ing state no longer remembered what he looked like. A few days later heactually reached Montbrison, found the locality which in his dream hadseemed unknown to him, and there met a gentleman whom he at oncerecognized as the Monsieur T. in the dream. The real person, however,looked much older than he had appeared in the dream.
At this point I may mention a dream of my own, in which what had to
be traced was not an impression but a connection. I had a dream of some-one who I knew in my dream was the doctor in my native town. His facewas indistinct, but was confused with a picture of one of the masters at mysecondary school, whom I still meet occasionally. When I woke up I couldnot discover what connection there was between these two men. I madesome enquiries from my mother, however, about this doctor who datedback to the earliest years of my childhood, and learnt that he had only oneeye. The schoolmaster whose ﬁgure had covered that of the doctor in thedream, was also one-eyed. It was thirty-eight years since I had seen the doc-tor, and so far as I know I had never thought of him in my waking life,though a scar on my chin might have reminded me of his attentions.
1
A number of writers, on the other hand, assert that elements are to be
found in most dreams, which are derived from the very last few days be-fore they were dreamt; and this sounds like an attempt to counterbalancethe laying of too much weight upon the part played in dream-life by ex-periences in childhood. Thus Robert (1886, 46) actually declares thatnormal dreams are as a rule concerned only with the impressions of thepast few days. We shall ﬁnd, however, that the theory of dreams con-structed by Robert makes it essential for him to bring forward the mostrecent impressions and leave the oldest out of sight. None the less the fact50 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [The last clause of this sentence was added in 1909, appears in all later editions
up to 1922, but was afterwards omitted. The reference to this same man on
p. 292 below only makes sense if it alludes to this omitted clause. The accidentthat caused the scar is mentioned in the disguised autobiographical case historyin Freud (1899a ), and the event itself is probably described below on p. 560.
This dream plays an important part in a letter to Fliess of October 15, 1897(Freud, 1950a, Letter 71); it is also described in Freud, 1916–17, Lecture 13.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 50stated by him remains correct, as I am able to conﬁrm from my own in-
vestigations. An American writer, Nelson [1888, 380 f.], is of the opinionthat the impressions most frequently employed in a dream arise from theday next but one before the dream occurs, or from the day preceding thatone—as though the impressions of the day immediately before the dream
were not sufﬁciently attenuated or remote.
Several writers who are anxious not to cast doubts on the intimate con-
nection between the content of dreams and waking life have been struckby the fact that impressions with which waking thoughts are intensely oc-cupied only appear in dreams after they have been pushed somewhat asideby the workings of daytime thought. Thus, after the death of someonedear to them, people do not as a rule dream of him to begin with, whilethey are overwhelmed by grief (Delage, 1891, [40]). On the other handone of the most recent observers, Miss Hallam (Hallam and Weed, 1896,410–11), has collected instances to the contrary, thus asserting the right ofeach of us to psychological individualism in this respect.
The third, most striking and least comprehensible characteristic of
memory in dreams is shown in the choice of material reproduced. For
what is found worth remembering is not, as in waking life, only what ismost important, but on the contrary what is most indifferent and in-signiﬁcant as well. On this point I will quote those writers who havegiven the strongest expression to their astonishment.
Hildebrandt (1875, 11): ‘For the remarkable thing is that dreams de-
rive their elements not from major and stirring events nor the powerfuland compelling interests of the preceding day, but from incidental details,from the worthless fragments, one might say, of what has been recentlyexperienced or of the remoter past. A family bereavement, which hasmoved us deeply and under whose immediate shadow we have fallenasleep late at night, is blotted out of our memory till with our ﬁrst wakingmoment it returns to it again with disturbing violence. On the otherhand, a wart on the forehead of a stranger whom we met in the street andto whom we gave no second thought after passing him hasa part to play
in our dream. . . . ’
Strümpell (1877, 39): ‘There are cases in which the analysis of a dream
shows that some of its components are indeed derived from experiences ofthe previous day or its predecessor, but experiences so unimportant and triv-ial from the point of view of waking consciousness that they were  forgotten51 B. Memory in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 51soon after they occurred. Experiences of this kind include, for instance,
 remarks accidentally overheard, or another person’s actions inattentively observed, or passing glimpses of people or things, or odd fragments of whatone has read, and so on.’
Havelock Ellis (1899, 727): ‘The profound emotions of waking life,
the questions and problems on which we spread our chief voluntary men-tal energy, are not those which usually present themselves at once to dreamconsciousness. It is, so far as the immediate past is concerned, mostly thetriﬂing, the incidental, the “forgotten” impressions of daily life whichreappear in our dreams. The psychic activities that are awake most in-tensely are those that sleep most profoundly.’
Binz (1878, 44–5) actually makes this particular peculiarity of mem-
ory in dreams the occasion for expressing his dissatisfaction with the ex-planations of dreams which he himself has supported: ‘And the naturaldream raises similar problems. Why do we not always dream of the mnemic impressions of the day we have just lived through? Why do weoften, without any apparent motive, plunge instead into the remote andalmost extinct past? Why does consciousness so often in dreams receivethe impression of indifferent memory-images, while the brain cells, just
where they carry the most sensitive marks of what has been experienced,lie for the most part silent and still, unless they have been stirred intofresh activity shortly before, during waking life?’
It is easy to see how the remarkable preference shown by the memory
in dreams for indifferent, and consequently unnoticed, elements in wak-ing experience is bound to lead people to overlook in general the depen-dence of dreams upon waking life and at all events to make it difﬁcult inany particular instance to prove that dependence. Thus Miss WhitonCalkins (1893, 315), in her statistical study of her own and her collabo-rator’s dreams, found that in eleven per cent of the total there was no visible connection with waking life. Hildebrandt (1875, [12 f.]) is un-questionably right in asserting that we should be able to explain the gen-esis of every dream-image if we devoted enough time and trouble totracing its origin. He speaks of this as ‘an exceedingly laborious andthankless task. For as a rule it ends in hunting out every kind of utterlyworthless psychical event from the remotest corners of the chambers ofone’s memory, and in dragging to light once again every kind of com-pletely indifferent moment of the past from the oblivion in which it wasburied in the very hour, perhaps, after it occurred.’ I can only regret thatthis keen-sighted author allowed himself to be deterred from following52 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 52the path which had this inauspicious beginning; if he had followed it, it
would have led him to the very heart of the explanation of dreams.
The way in which the memory behaves in dreams is undoubtedly of
the greatest importance for any theory of memory in general. It teachesus that ‘nothing which we have once mentally possessed can be entirelylost’ (Scholz, 1893, 59); or, as Delboeuf [1885, 115] puts it, ‘que touteimpression même la plus insigniﬁante, laisse une trace inaltérable, in-déﬁniment susceptible de reparâitre au jour.’
1This is a conclusion to
which we are also driven by many pathological phenomena of mental life.Certain theories about dreams which we shall mention later seek to ac-count for their absurdity and incoherence by a partial forgetting of whatwe know during the day. When we bear in mind the extraordinary efﬁ-ciency that we have just seen exhibited by memory in dreams we shallhave a lively sense of the contradiction which these theories involve.
It might perhaps occur to us that the phenomenon of dreaming could
be reduced entirely to that of memory: dreams, it might be supposed, are amanifestation of a reproductive activity which is at work even in the nightand which is an end in itself. This would tally with statements such asthose made by Pilcz (1899), according to which there is a ﬁxed relation ob-servable between the time at which a dream occurs and its content— impressions from the remotest past being reproduced in dreams duringdeep sleep, while more recent impressions appear towards morning. Butviews of this sort are inherently improbable owing to the manner in whichdreams deal with the material that is to be remembered. Strümpell [1877,18] rightly points out that dreams do not reproduce experiences. They takeone step forward, but the next step in the chain is omitted, or appears inan altered form, or is replaced by something entirely extraneous. Dreamsyield no more than fragments of reproductions; and this is so general a rule
that theoretical conclusions may be based on it. It is true that there are ex-ceptional cases in which a dream repeats an experience with as much com-pleteness as is attainable by our waking memory. Delboeuf [1885, 239 f.]tells how one of his university colleagues
2had a dream which reproduced53 B. Memory in Dreams
1 [‘That even the most insigniﬁcant impression leaves an unalterable trace, which
is indeﬁnitely capable of revival.’]
2 [In the ﬁrst edition the words ‘who is now teaching in Vienna’ appeared here but
they were cut out in 1909. In Ges. Schr. 3(1925), 8, Freud remarks that ‘the words
were no doubt rightly omitted, especially as the man in question had died.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 53in all its details a dangerous carriage-accident he had had, with an almost
miraculous escape. Miss Calkins (1893) mentions two dreams whose con-tent was an exact reproduction of an event of the previous day, and I shallmyself have occasion later to report an example I came across of a child-hood experience re-appearing in a dream without modiﬁcation. [See pp.212 and 219.]
1
(C)
THE STIMULI AND SOURCES OF DREAMS
There is a popular saying that ‘dreams come from indigestion’ and this
helps us to see what is meant by the stimuli and sources of dreams. Be-hind these concepts lies a theory according to which dreams are a resultof a disturbance of sleep: we should not have had a dream unless some-thing disturbing had happened during our sleep, and the dream was a re-action to that disturbance.
Discussions upon the exciting causes of dreams occupy a very large
space in the literature of the subject. The problem could obviously onlyarise after dreams had become a subject of biological investigation. Theancients, who believed that dreams were inspired by the gods, had noneed to look around for their stimulus: dreams emanated from the will ofdivine or daemonic powers and their content arose from the knowledgeor purpose of those powers. Science was immediately faced by the ques-tion of whether the stimulus to dreaming was always the same or whetherthere could be many kinds of such stimuli; and this involved the consid-eration of whether the explanation of the causation of dreams fell withinthe province of psychology or rather of physiology. Most authorities seem54 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1909:] Subsequent experience leads me to add that it by no
means rarely happens that innocent and unimportant actions of the previous day
are repeated in a dream: such, for instance, as packing a trunk, preparing foodin the kitchen, and so on. What the dreamer is himself stressing in dreams ofthis kind is not, however, the content of the memory but the fact of its being‘real’: ‘I really did do all that yesterday.’ [Cf. below pp. 210 and 383 f. The topics
discussed in this and the preceding section are taken up again in the ﬁrst twosections of Chapter V (pp. 187 ff.)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 54to agree in assuming that the causes that disturb sleep—that is, the
sources of dreaming—may be of many kinds and that somatic stimuliand mental excitations alike may come to act as instigators of dreams.Opinions differ widely, however, in the preference they show for one orthe other source of dreams and in the order of importance which they as-sign to them as factors in the production of dreams.
Any complete enumeration of the sources of dreams leads to a recog-
nition of four kinds of source; and these have also been used for the clas-siﬁcation of dreams themselves. They are: (1) external (objective) sensoryexcitations; (2) internal (subjective) sensory excitations; (3) internal (or-ganic) somatic stimuli; and (4) purely psychical sources of stimulation.
1. External Sensory Stimuli
The younger Strümpell [1883–4; Engl. trans. (1912), 2, 160], the son
of the philosopher whose book on dreams has already given us severalhints upon their problems, published a well-known account of his obser-vations upon one of his patients who was afﬂicted with general anaesthesiaof the surface of his body and paralysis of several of his higher sense organs.If the few of this man’s sensory channels which remained open to the ex-ternal world were closed, he would fall asleep. Now when we ourselveswish to go to sleep we are in the habit of trying to produce a situation sim-ilar to that of Strümpell’s experiment. We close our most important sen-sory channels, our eyes, and try to protect the other senses from all stimulior from any modiﬁcation of the stimuli acting on them. We then fallasleep, even though our plan is never completely realized. We cannot keepstimuli completely away from our sense organs nor can we completely sus-pend the excitability of our sense organs. The fact that a fairly powerfulstimulus will awaken us at any time is evidence that ‘even in sleep the soulis in constant contact with the extracorporeal world.’
1The sensory stimuli
that reach us during sleep may very well become sources of dreams.
Now there are a great number of such stimuli, ranging from the un-
avoidable ones which the state of sleep itself necessarily involves or musttolerate from time to time, to the accidental, rousing stimuli which mayor do put an end to sleep. A bright light may force its way into our eyes,55 C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams
1 [Cf. Burdach’s remarks on p. 82 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 55or a noise may make itself heard, or some strong-smelling substance may
stimulate the mucous membrane of our nose. By unintentional move-ments during our sleep we may uncover some part of our body and exposeit to sensations of chill, or by a change in posture we may ourselves bringabout sensations of pressure or contact. We may be stung by a gnat, orsome small mishap during the night may impinge upon several of oursenses at once. Attentive observers have collected a whole series of dreamsin which there has been such a far-reaching correspondence between astimulus noticed on waking and a portion of the content of the dream thatit has been possible to identify the stimulus as the source of the dream.
I will quote from Jessen (1855, 527 f.) a collection of dreams of this
kind which may be traced back to objective, and more or less accidental,sensory stimulation.
‘Every noise that is indistinctly perceived arouses corresponding
dream-images. A peal of thunder will set us in the midst of a battle; thecrowing of a cock may turn into a man’s cry of terror; the creaking of adoor may produce a dream of burglars. If our bedclothes fall off in thenight, we may dream, perhaps, of walking about naked or of falling intowater. If we are lying crosswise in bed and push our feet over the edge, wemay dream that we are standing on the brink of a frightful precipice orthat we are falling over a cliff. If our head happens to get under the pillow,we dream of being beneath a huge overhanging rock which is on thepoint of burying us under its weight. Accumulations of semen lead to las-civious dreams, local pains produce ideas of being ill-treated, attacked orinjured. . . . 
‘Meier (1758, 33) once dreamt that he was overpowered by some men
who stretched him out on his back on the ground and drove a stake intothe earth between his big toe and the next one. While he was imaginingthis in the dream he woke up and found that a straw was sticking betweenhis toes. On another occasion, according to Hennings (1784, 258), whenMeier had fastened his shirt rather tight round his neck, he dreamt thathe was being hanged. Hoffbauer [(1796, 146)] dreamt when he was ayoung man of falling down from a high wall, and when he woke upfound that his bedstead had collapsed and that he had really fallen on tothe ﬂoor. . . . Gregory reports that once, when he was lying with his feeton a hot-water bottle, he dreamt he had climbed to the top of MountEtna and that the ground there was intolerably hot. Another man, whowas sleeping with a hot poultice on his head, dreamt that he was beingscalped by a band of Red Indians; while a third, who was wearing a damp56 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 56nightshirt, imagined that he was being dragged through a stream. An at-
tack of gout that came on suddenly during sleep caused the patient to be-lieve he was in the hands of the Inquisition and being tortured on therack. (Macnish [1835, 40].)’
The argument based on the similarity between the stimulus and the
content of the dream gains in strength if it is possible deliberately to con-vey a sensory stimulus to the sleeper and produce in him a dream corre-sponding to that stimulus. According to Macnish (loc. Cit.), quoted byJessen (1855, 529), experiments of this sort had already been made byGirou de Buzareingues [1848, 55]. ‘He left his knee uncovered and dreamtthat he was travelling at night in a mail coach. He remarks upon this thattravellers will no doubt be aware how cold one’s knees become at night ina coach. Another time he left his head uncovered at the back and dreamtthat he was taking part in a religious ceremony in the open air. It must beexplained that in the country in which he lived it was the custom alwaysto keep the head covered except in circumstances such as these.’
Maury (1878, [154–6]) brings forward some new observations of dreams
produced in himself. (A number of other experiments were unsuccessful.)
(1) His lips and the tip of his nose were tickled with a feather.—He
dreamt of a frightful form of torture: a mask made of pitch was placed onhis face and then pulled off, so that it took his skin off with it.
(2) A pair of scissors was sharpened on a pair of pliers.—He heard
bells pealing, followed by alarm-bells, and he was back in the June daysof 1848.
(3) He was given some eau-de-cologne to smell.—He was in Cairo,
in Johann Maria Farina’s shop. Some absurd adventures followed, whichhe could not reproduce.
(4) He was pinched lightly on the neck.—He dreamt he was being
given a mustard plaster and thought of the doctor who had treated himas a child.
(5) A hot iron was brought close to his face.—He dreamt that the
‘chauffeurs ’
1had made their way into the house and were forcing its in-
habitants to give up their money by sticking their feet into braziers of hotcoal. The Duchess of Abrantès, whose secretary he was in the dream, thenappeared.57 C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams
1 The ‘ chauffeurs ’ [heaters] were bands of robbers in La Vendée [at the time of the
French Revolution], who made use of the method of torture described above.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 57(8) A drop of water was dropped on his forehead.—He was in Italy,
was sweating violently and was drinking white Orvieto wine.
(9) Light from a candle was repeatedly shone upon him through a
sheet of red paper.—He dreamt of the weather and of the heat, and was
once again in a storm he had experienced in the English Channel.
Other attempts at producing dreams experimentally have been re-
ported by Hervey de Saint-Denys [1867, 268 f. and 376 f.], Weygandt(1893) and others.
Many writers have commented upon ‘the striking facility with which
dreams are able to weave a sudden impression from the world of thesenses into their own structure so that it comes as what appears to be apre-arranged catastrophe that has been gradually led up to.’ (Hildebrandt,1875, [36].) ‘In my youth,’ this author goes on, ‘I used to make use of analarm-clock in order to be up regularly at a ﬁxed hour. It must have hap-pened hundreds of times that the noise produced by this instrument ﬁt-ted into an ostensibly lengthy and connected dream as though the wholedream had been leading up to that one event and had reached its ap-pointed end in what was a logically indispensable climax.’ [Ibid., 37.]
I shall quote three of these alarm-clock dreams presently in another
connection. [Pp. 60.]
Volkelt (1875, 108 f.) writes: ‘A composer once dreamt that he was
giving a class and was trying to make a point clear to his pupils. When hehad done, he turned to one of the boys and asked him if he had followed.The boy shouted back like a lunatic: “Oh ja! [Oh yes!]” He began to re-prove the boy angrily for shouting, but the whole class broke out intocries ﬁrst of “Orja!,” then of “Eurjo!” and ﬁnally of “Feuerjo!”
1At this
point he was woken up by actual cries of “Feuerjo!” in the street.’
Garnier (1865, [1, 476]) tells how Napoleon I was woken by a bomb
explosion while he was asleep in his carriage. He had a dream that he wasonce more crossing the Tagliamento under the Austrian bombardment,and at last started up with a cry: ‘We are undermined!’
2
A dream dreamt by Maury (1878, 161) has become famous. He was
ill and lying in his room in bed, with his mother sitting beside him, anddreamt that it was during the Reign of Terror. After witnessing a numberof frightful scenes of murder, he was ﬁnally himself brought before the58 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [The ﬁrst two of these last three exclamations are meaningless; the third is the
conventional cry for an alarm of ﬁre.]
2 [Further considered below on pp. 252 f. and 501 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 58revolutionary tribunal. There he saw Robespierre, Marat, Fouquier-
Tinville and the rest of the grim heroes of those terrible days. He wasquestioned by them, and, after a number of incidents which were not re-tained in his memory, was condemned, and led to the place of executionsurrounded by an immense mob. He climbed on to the scaffold and wasbound to the plank by the executioner. It was tipped up. The blade of theguillotine fell. He felt his head being separated from his body, woke up inextreme anxiety—and found that the top of the bed had fallen down andhad struck his cervical vertebrae just in the way in which the blade of theguillotine would actually have struck them.
This dream was the basis of an interesting discussion between Le Lor-
rain (1894) and Egger (1895) in the Revue philosophique . The question
raised was whether and how it was possible for a dreamer to compress suchan apparently superabundant quantity of material into the short periodelapsing between his perceiving the rousing stimulus and his waking.
1
Examples of this kind leave an impression that of all the sources of
dreams the best conﬁrmed are objective sensory stimuli during sleep.Moreover they are the only sources whatever taken into account by lay-men. If an educated man, who is unacquainted with the literature ofdreams, is asked how dreams arise, he will infallibly answer with a refer-ence to some instance he has come across in which a dream was explainedby an objective sensory stimulus discovered after waking. Scientiﬁc en-quiry, however, cannot stop there. It ﬁnds an occasion for further ques-tions in the observed fact that the stimulus which impinges on the sensesduring sleep does not appear in the dream in its real shape but is replacedby another image in some way related to it. But the relation connectingthe stimulus of the dream to the dream which is its result is, to quoteMaury’s words (1854, 72), ‘une afﬁnité quelconque, mais qui n’est pasunique et exclusive.’
2Let us consider in this connection three of Hilde-
brandt’s alarm-clock dreams (1875, 37 f.). The question they raise is whythe same stimulus should have provoked three such different dreams andwhy it should have provoked these rather than any other.
‘I dreamt, then, that one spring morning I was going for a walk and
was strolling through the green ﬁelds till I came to a neighbouring village,where I saw the villagers in their best clothes, with hymn-books under59 C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams
1 [Further discussed below, pp. 93 and 500 f.]
2 [‘An afﬁnity of some kind, but one which is not unique and exclusive.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 59their arms, ﬂocking to the church. Of course! It was Sunday, and early
morning service would soon be beginning. I decided I would attend it;but ﬁrst, as I was rather hot from walking, I went into the churchyardwhich surrounded the church, to cool down. While I was reading someof the tombstones, I heard the bell-ringer climbing up the church towerand at the top of it I now saw the little village bell which would presentlygive the signal for the beginning of devotions. For quite a while it hungthere motionless, then it began to swing, and suddenly its peal began toring out clear and piercing—so clear and piercing that it put an end tomy sleep. But what was ringing was the alarm-clock.
‘Here is another instance. It was a bright winter’s day and the streets
were covered with deep snow. I had agreed to join a party for a sleigh-ride; but I had to wait a long time before news came that the sleigh wasat the door. Now followed the preparations for getting in—the fur rugspread out, the foot-muff put ready—and at last I was sitting in my seat.But even then the moment of departure was delayed till a pull at the reinsgave the waiting horses the signal. Then off they started, and, with a vio-lent shake, the sleigh bells broke into their familiar jingle—with such vi-olence, in fact, that in a moment the cobweb of my dream was tornthrough. And once again it was only the shrill sound of the alarm-clock.
‘And now yet a third example. I saw a kitchen-maid, carrying several
dozen plates piled on one another, walking along the passage to the dining-room. The column of china in her arms seemed to me in danger of losingits balance. “Take care,” I exclaimed, “or you’ll drop the whole load.” Theinevitable rejoinder duly followed: she was quite accustomed to that kindof job, and so on. And meanwhile my anxious looks followed the advanc-ing ﬁgure. Then—just as I expected—she stumbled at the threshold andthe fragile crockery slipped and rattled and clattered in a hundred pieceson the ﬂoor. But the noise continued without ceasing, and soon it seemedno longer to be a clattering; it was turning into a  ringing—and the ring-ing, as my waking self now became aware, was only the alarm-clock doingits duty.’
The question of why the mind mistakes the nature of objective sen-
sory stimuli in dreams receives almost the same answer from Strümpell(1877, [103]) as from Wundt (1874, [659 f.]): the mind receives stimulithat reach it during sleep under conditions favourable to the formation of illusions. A sense-impression is recognized by us and correctly interpreted—that is, it is placed in the group of memories to which, in accordance withall our previous experiences, it belongs—provided the impression is suf-60 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 60ﬁciently strong, clear and lasting and provided we have sufﬁcient time at
our disposal for considering the matter. If these conditions are not ful-ﬁlled, we mistake the object which is the source of the impression: weform an illusion about it. ‘If someone goes for a walk in the open countryand has an indeterminate perception of a distant object, he may at ﬁrstbelieve it to be a horse.’ On a closer view he may be led to interpret it asa cow lying down, and the image may ﬁnally resolve itself deﬁnitely intoa group of people sitting on the ground. The impressions received by themind from external stimuli during sleep are of a similarly indeterminatenature; and on their basis the mind forms illusions, since a greater orsmaller number of memory-images are aroused by the impression and it is through them that it acquires its psychical value. From which of the
many groups of memories concerned the related images shall be arousedand which of the possible associative connections shall accordingly
be put into action—these questions too, on Strümpell’s theory, are in -determinable and are, as it were, left open to the arbitrary decision ofthe mind.
At this point we are faced with a choice between two alternatives. We
may admit it as a fact that it is impossible to follow the laws governingthe formation of dreams any further; and we may accordingly refrainfrom enquiring whether there may not be other determinants governingthe interpretation put by the dreamer upon the illusion called up by thesense-impression. Or, on the other hand, we may have a suspicion thatthe sensory stimulus which impinges on the sleeper plays only a modestpart in generating his dream and that other factors determine the choiceof the memory-images which are to be aroused in him. In fact, if we ex-amine Maury’s experimentally produced dreams (which I have related insuch detail for this very reason), we shall be tempted to say that the ex-periment in fact accounts for the origin of only one element of thedreams; the rest of their content seems too self-contained, too deﬁnite inits details, to be explicable solely by the necessity for ﬁtting in with the el-ement experimentally introduced from outside. Indeed, one begins tohave doubts about the illusion theory and about the power of objectiveimpressions to give a shape to dreams when one ﬁnds that those impres-sions are sometimes subjected in dreams to the most peculiar and far-fetched interpretations. Thus Simon (1888) tells us of a dream in whichhe saw some gigantic ﬁgures seated at table and clearly heard the frightfulsnapping noise made by their jaws coming together as they chewed.61 C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 61When he awoke he heard the beat of a horse’s hooves galloping past his
window. The noise made by the horse’s hooves may have suggested ideasfrom a group of memories connected with Gulliver’s Travels —the giants
of Brobdingnag and the virtuous Houyhnhnms—if I may venture on aninterpretation without the dreamer’s assistance. Is it not probable, then,that the choice of such an unusual group of memories as these was facili-tated by motives other than the objective stimulus alone?
1
2. Internal (Subjective) Sensory Excitations
In spite of any objections to the contrary, it has to be admitted that
the part played by objective sensory excitations during sleep in provokingdreams remains indisputable. And if such stimuli may appear, from theirnature and frequency, insufﬁcient to explain every dream-image, we shall
be encouraged to seek for other sources of dreams analogous to them intheir operation. I cannot say when the idea ﬁrst cropped up of taking in-
ternal (subjective) excitations of the sense organs into account alongside
of the external sensory stimuli. It is, however, the case that this is done,
more or less explicitly, in all the more recent discussions of the aetiologyof dreams. ‘An essential part is also played, I believe,’ writes Wundt(1874, 657), ‘in the production of the illusions that occur in dreams bythe subjective visual and auditory sensations which are familiar to us inthe waking state as the formless areas of luminosity which become visibleto us when our ﬁeld of vision is darkened, as ringing or buzzing in theears, and so on. Especially important among these are the subjective exci-tations of the retina. It is in this way that is to be explained the remark-able tendency of dreams to conjure up before the eyes similar or identicalobjects in large numbers. We see before us innumerable birds or butter-ﬂies or ﬁshes or coloured beads or ﬂowers, etc. Here the luminous dust inthe darkened ﬁeld of vision has taken on a fantastic shape, and the nu-merous specks of which it consists are incorporated into the dream as an62 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1911:] The appearance of gigantic ﬁgures in a dream gives
grounds for supposing that some scene from the dreamer’s childhood is involved
[Cf. p. 417.]—[ Added 1925:] Incidentally, the interpretation given in the text,
pointing to a reminiscence of Gulliver’s Travels, is a good example of what an in-
terpretation ought not to be. The interpreter of a dream should not give free
play to his own ingenuity and neglect the dreamer’s associations.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 62equal number of separate images; and these, on account of their mobility,
are regarded as moving objects.—This is no doubt also the basis of the
great fondness shown by dreams for animal ﬁgures of every sort; for theimmense variety of such forms can adjust itself easily to the particularform assumed by the subjective luminous images.’
As sources of dream-images, subjective sensory excitations have the ob-
vious advantage of not being dependent, like objective ones, upon externalchance. They are ready to hand, as one might say, whenever they areneeded as an explanation. But they are at a disadvantage compared withobjective sensory stimuli in that the part they play in instigating a dreamis scarcely or not at all open to conﬁrmation, as is the case with objectivestimuli, by observation and experiment. The chief evidence in favour ofthe power of subjective sensory excitations to instigate dreams is providedby what are known as ‘hypnagogic hallucinations,’ or, to use JohannesMüller’s term (1826), ‘imaginative visual phenomena.’ These are images,often very vivid and rapidly changing, which are apt to  appear—quite ha-bitually in some people—during the period of falling asleep; and they mayalso persist for a time after the eyes have been opened. Maury, who wassubject to them in a high degree, has made an exhaustive examination ofthem and maintains (as did Müller [ibid., 49 f.] before him) their connec-tion and indeed their identity with dream-images. In order to producethem, he says (Maury, 1878, 59 f.), a certain amount of mental passivity,a relaxation of the strain of attention, is necessary. It is enough, however,to fall into a lethargic state of this kind for no more than a second (pro-vided that one has the necessary predisposition) in order to have a hypna-gogic hallucination. After this one may perhaps wake up again and theprocess may be repeated several times until one ﬁnally falls asleep. Mauryfound that if he then woke up once more after not too long an interval, hewas able to detect in his dream the same images that had ﬂoated before hiseyes as hypnagogic hallucinations before he fell asleep. (Ibid., 134 f.) Thiswas the case on one occasion with a number of grotesque ﬁgures with dis-torted faces and strange coiffures which pestered him with extreme perti-
nacity while he was going to sleep and which he remembered havingdreamt about after he woke. Another time, when he was suffering fromhunger owing to having put himself on a light diet, he had a hypnagogicvision of a plate and a hand armed with a fork which was helping itself tosome of the food from the plate. In the dream which followed he was sit-ting at a well-spread table and heard the noise made by the diners withtheir forks. Yet another time, when he went to sleep with his eyes in an63 C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 63 irritated and painful state, he had a hypnagogic hallucination of some mi-
croscopically small signs which he could only decipher one by one withthe greatest difﬁculty, he was woken from his sleep an hour later and re-membered a dream in which there was an open book printed in very smalltype which he was reading painfully.
Auditory hallucinations of words, names, and so on can also occur
hypnagogically in the same way as visual images, and may then be re-peated in a dream—just as an overture announces the principal themeswhich are to be heard in the opera that is to follow.
A more recent observer of hypnagogic hallucinations, G. T rumbull
Ladd (1892), has followed the same lines as Müller and Maury. Aftersome practice he succeeded in being able to wake himself suddenly with-out opening his eyes, from two to ﬁve minutes after gradually fallingasleep. He thus had an opportunity of comparing the retinal sensationswhich were just disappearing with the dream-images persisting in hismemory. He declares that it was possible in every case to recognize an in-ternal relation between the two, for the luminous points and lines of theidioretinal light provided, as it were, an outline drawing or diagram of theﬁgures mentally perceived in the dream. For instance, an arrangement ofthe luminous points in the retina in parallel lines corresponded to adream in which he had been seeing, clearly spread out in front of him,some lines of print which he was engaged in reading. Or, to use his ownwords, ‘the clearly printed page which I was reading in my dream fadedaway into an object that appeared to my waking consciousness like a sec-tion of an actual page of print when seen through an oval hole in a pieceof paper at too great a distance to distinguish more than an occasionalfragment of a word, and even that dimly.’ Ladd is of the opinion (thoughhe does not underestimate the part played in the phenomenon by central[cerebral] factors) that scarcely a single visual dream occurs without theparticipation of material provided by intraocular retinal excitation. Thisapplies especially to dreams occurring soon after falling asleep in a darkroom, while the source of stimulus for dreams occurring in the morningshortly before waking is the objective light which penetrates the eyes in aroom that is growing light. The changing, perpetually shifting characterof the excitation of the idioretinal light corresponds precisely to the con-stantly moving succession of images shown us by our dreams. No onewho attaches importance to these observations of Ladd’s will underesti-mate the part played in dreams by these subjective sources of stimulation,for, as we know, visual images constitute the principal component of our64 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 64dreams. The contributions from the other senses, except for that of hear-
ing, are intermittent and of less importance.
3. Internal Organic Somatic Stimuli
Since we are now engaged in looking for sources of dreams inside the
organism instead of outside it, we must bear in mind that almost all ourinternal organs, though they give us scarcely any news of their working solong as they are in a healthy state, become a source of what are mainlydistressing sensations when they are in what we describe as states of exci-tation, or during illnesses. These sensations must be equated with the sen-sory or painful stimuli reaching us from the outside. The experience ofages is reﬂected in—to take an example—Strümpell’s remarks on the sub-ject (1877, 107): ‘During sleep the mind attains a far deeper and widersensory consciousness of somatic events than during the waking state. Itis obliged to receive and be affected by impressions of stimuli from partsof the body and from changes in the body of which it knows nothingwhen awake.’ So early a writer as Aristotle regarded it as quite possiblethat the beginnings of an illness might make themselves felt in dreams be-fore anything could be noticed of it in waking life, owing to the magni-fying effect produced upon impressions by dreams. (See above, p. 37.)Medical writers, too, who were certainly far from believing in theprophetic power of dreams, have not disputed their signiﬁcance as pre-monitors of illness. (Cf. Simon, 1888, 31, and many earlier writers.
1)65 C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Apart from the diagnostic value ascribed to dreams (e.g. in
the works of Hippocrates [see above p. 37 n. 2]), their therapeutic importance in
antiquity must also be borne in mind. In Greece there were dream oracles, which
were regularly visited by patients in search of recovery. A sick man would enter thetemple of Apollo or Aesculapius, would perform various ceremonies there, wouldbe puriﬁed by lustration, massage and incense, and then, in a state of exaltation,would be stretched on the skin of a ram that had been sacriﬁced. He would thenfall asleep and would dream of the remedies for his illness. These would be re-vealed to him either in their natural form or in symbols and pictures which wouldafterwards be interpreted by the priests. For further information upon therapeuticdreams among the Greeks see Lehmann (1908, 1, 74), Bouché-Leclercq (1879–
1882), Hermann (1858, §41, 262 ff., and 1882, §38, 356), Böttinger (1795,163 ff.), Lloyd (1877), Döllinger (1857, 130).—[A comment on the ‘diagnostic’value of dreams will be found near the beginning of Freud, 1917d.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 65Instances of the diagnostic power of dreams seem to be vouched for in
more recent times. Thus Tissié (1898, 62 f.) quotes from Artigues (1884,
43) the story of a forty-three-year-old woman, who, while apparently inperfect health, was for some years tormented by anxiety-dreams. She wasthen medically examined and found to be in the early stages of an affec-tion of the heart, to which she eventually succumbed.
Pronounced disorders of the internal organs obviously act as instiga-
tors of dreams in a whole number of cases. The frequency of anxiety-dreams in diseases of the heart and lungs is generally recognized. Indeed,this side of dream-life is placed in the foreground by so many authoritiesthat I am content with a mere reference to the literature: Radestock[1879, 70], Spitta [1882, 241 f.], Maury [1878, 33 f.], Simon (1888),Tissié [1898, 60 ff.]. Tissié is even of the opinion that the particular or-gan affected gives a characteristic impress to the content of the dream.Thus the dreams of those suffering from diseases of the heart are usuallyshort and come to a terrifying end at the moment of waking; their con-tent almost always includes a situation involving a horrible death. Suffer-ers from diseases of the lungs dream of suffocation, crowding and ﬂeeing,and are remarkably subject to the familiar nightmare. (It may be re-marked, incidentally, that Börner (1855) has succeeded in provoking thelatter experimentally by lying on his face or covering the respiratory aper-tures.) In the case of digestive disorders dreams contain ideas connectedwith enjoyment of food or disgust. Finally, the inﬂuence of sexual excite-ment on the content of dreams can be adequately appreciated by every-one from his own experience and provides the theory that dreams areinstigated by organic stimuli with its most powerful support.
No one, moreover, who goes through the literature of the subject can
fail to notice that some writers, such as Maury [1878, 451 f.] and Wey-gandt (1893), were led to the study of dream problems by the effect oftheir own illnesses upon the content of their dreams.
Nevertheless, though these facts are established beyond a doubt, their
importance for the study of the sources of dreams is not so great as mighthave been hoped. Dreams are phenomena which occur in healthypeople—perhaps in everyone, perhaps every night—and it is obvious thatorganic illness cannot be counted among its indispensable conditions. Andwhat we are concerned with is not the origin of certain special dreams butthe source that instigates the ordinary dreams of normal people.
We need only go a step further, however, in order to come upon a
source of dreams more copious than any we have so far considered, one66 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 66indeed which seems as though it could never run dry. If it is established
that the interior of the body when it is in a diseased state becomes asource of stimuli for dreams, and if we admit that during sleep the mind,being diverted from the external world, is able to pay more attention tothe interior of the body, then it seems plausible to suppose that the inter-nal organs do not need to be diseased before they can cause excitationsto reach the sleeping mind—excitations which are somehow turned intodream-images. While we are awake we are aware of a diffuse general sen-sibility or coenaesthesia, but only as a vague quality of our mood; to thisfeeling, according to medical opinion, all the organic systems contributea share. At night, however, it would seem that this same feeling, growninto a powerful inﬂuence and acting through its various components, be-comes the strongest and at the same time the commonest source for in-stigating dream-images. If this is so, it would only remain to investigatethe laws according to which the organic stimuli turn into dream-images.
We have here reached the theory of the origin of dreams which is pre-
ferred by all the medical authorities. The obscurity in which the centre ofour being (the ‘ moi splanchnique ,’ as Tissié [1898, 23] calls it) is veiled
from our knowledge and the obscurity surrounding the origin of dreamstally too well not to be brought into relation to each other. The line ofthought which regards vegetative organic sensation as the constructor ofdreams has, moreover, a particular attraction for medical men since it al-lows of a single aetiology for dreams and mental diseases, whose manifes-tations have so much in common; for coenaesthetic changes and stimuliarising from the internal organs are also held largely responsible for theorigin of the psychoses. It is not surprising, therefore, that the origin ofthe theory of somatic stimulation may be traced back to more than oneindependent source.
The line of argument developed by the philosopher Schopenhauer in
1851 has had a decisive inﬂuence on a number of writers. Our picture ofthe universe, in his view, is arrived at by our intellect taking the impres-sions that impinge on it from outside and remoulding them into theforms of time, space and causality. During the daytime the stimuli fromthe interior of the organism, from the sympathetic nervous system, exer-cise at the most an unconscious effect upon our mood. But at night, whenwe are no longer deafened by the impressions of the day, those which arisefrom within are able to attract attention—just as at night we can hear themurmuring of a brook which is drowned by daytime noises. But how isthe intellect to react to these stimuli otherwise than by carrying out its67 C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 67own peculiar function on them? The stimuli are accordingly remodelled
into forms occupying space and time and obeying the rules of causality,and thus dreams arise [cf. Schopenhauer, 1862, 1, 249 ff.]. Scherner
(1861) and after him Volkelt (1875) endeavoured subsequently to inves-tigate in more detail the relation between somatic stimuli and dream- images, but I shall postpone my consideration of these attempts till wereach the section dealing with the various theories about dreams. [See be-low, pp. 109 ff.]
Krauss [1859, 255], the psychiatrist, in an investigation carried
through with remarkable consistency, traces the origin alike of dreamsand of deliria
1and delusions to the same factor, namely to organically de-
termined sensations. It is scarcely possible to think of any part of the or-ganism which might not be the starting point of a dream or of a delusion.Organically determined sensations ‘may be divided into two classes: (1)those constituting the general mood (coenaesthesia) and (2) the speciﬁcsensations immanent in the principal systems of the vegetative organism.Of these latter ﬁve groups are to be distinguished: (a)muscular, (b)respir -
atory, (c)gastric, (d)sexual and (e) peripheral sensations.’ Krauss sup-
poses that the process by which dream-images arise on the basis of
somatic stimuli is as follows. The sensation that has been aroused evokesa cognate image, in accordance with some law of association. It combineswith the image into an organic structure, to which, however, conscious-ness reacts abnormally. For it pays no attention to the sensation , but di-
rects the whole of it to the accompanying images—which explains why
the true facts were for so long misunderstood. Krauss has a special termfor describing this process: the ‘trans-substantiation’ of sensations intodream-images.
The inﬂuence of organic somatic stimuli upon the formation of
dreams is almost universally accepted today; but the question of the lawsthat govern the relation between them is answered in very various ways,and often by obscure pronouncements. On the basis of the theory of so-matic stimulation, dream-interpretation is thus faced with the specialproblem of tracing back the content of a dream to the organic stimuliwhich caused it; and, if the rules for interpretation laid down by Scherner(1861) are not accepted, one is often faced with the awkward fact that the68 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1[Perhaps ‘hallucinations’; see p. 87 n.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 68only thing that reveals the existence of the organic stimulus is precisely
the content of the dream itself.
There is a fair amount of agreement, however, over the interpretation
of various forms of dreams that are described as ‘typical,’ because they oc-cur in large numbers of people and with very similar content. Such are thefamiliar dreams of falling from a height, of teeth falling out, of ﬂying andof embarrassment at being naked or insufﬁciently clad. This last dream isattributed simply to the sleeper’s perceiving that he has thrown off his bed-clothes in his sleep and is lying exposed to the air. The dream of teethfalling out is traced back to a ‘dental stimulus,’ though this does not nec-essarily imply that the excitation of the teeth is a pathological one. Accord-ing to Strümpel [1877, 119] the ﬂying dream is the image which is foundappropriate by the mind as an interpretation of the stimulus produced bythe rising and sinking of the lobes of the lungs at times when cutaneoussensations in the thorax have ceased to be conscious: it is this latter circum-stance that leads to the feeling which is attached to the idea of ﬂoating.The dream of falling from a height is said to be due to an arm falling awayfrom the body or a ﬂexed knee being suddenly extended at a time whenthe sense of cutaneous pressure is beginning to be no longer conscious; themovements in question cause the tactile sensations to become consciousonce more, and the transition to consciousness is represented psychicallyby the dream of falling (ibid., 118). The obvious weakness of these at-tempted explanations, plausible though they are, lies in the fact that, with-out any other evidence, they can make successive hypotheses that this orthat group of organic sensations enters or disappears from mental percep-tion, till a constellation has been reached which  affords an explanation ofthe dream. I shall later have occasion to return to the question of typicaldreams and their origin. [Cf. pp. 259 ff. and 395 ff.]
Simon (1888, 34 f.) has attempted to deduce some of the rules gov-
erning the way in which organic stimuli determine the resultant dreamsby comparing a series of similar dreams. He asserts that if an organic ap-paratus which normally plays a part in the expression of an emotion isbrought by some extraneous cause during sleep into the state of excitationwhich is usually produced by the emotion, then a dream will arise whichwill contain images appropriate to the emotion in question. Another rulelays it down that if during sleep an organ is in a state of activity, excitationor disturbance, the dream will produce images related to the performanceof the function which is discharged by the organ concerned.69 C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 69Mourly Vold (1896) has set out to prove experimentally in one partic-
ular ﬁeld the effect on the production of dreams which is asserted by the
theory of somatic stimulation. His experiments consisted in alteringthe position of a sleeper’s limbs and comparing the resultant dreams withthe alterations made. He states his ﬁndings as follows:
(1) The position of a limb in the dream corresponds approximately to
its position in reality. Thus, we dream of the limb being in a static condi-tion when it is so actually.
(2) If we dream of a limb moving, then one of the positions passed
through in the course of completing the movement invariably corre-sponds to the limb’s actual position.
(3) The position of the dreamer’s own limb may be ascribed in the
dream to some other person.
(4) The dream may be of the movement in question being hindered.
(5) The limb which is in the position in question may appear in the
dream as an animal or monster, in which case a certain analogy is estab-lished between them.
(6) The position of a limb may give rise in the dream to thoughts
which have some connection with the limb. Thus, if the ﬁngers are con-cerned, we dream of numbers.
I should be inclined to conclude from ﬁndings such as these that even
the theory of somatic stimulation has not succeeded in completely doingaway with the apparent absence of determination in the choice of whatdream-images are to be produced.
1
4. Psychical Sources of Stimulation
When we were dealing with the relations of dreams to waking life and
with the material of dreams, we found that the most ancient and the mostrecent students of dreams were united in believing that men dream of whatthey do during the daytime and of what interests them while they areawake [pp. 41 f.]. Such an interest, carried over from waking life into sleep,would not only be a mental bond, a link between dreams and life, butwould also provide us with a further source of dreams and one not to be70 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] This author has since produced a two-volume report on
his experiments (1910 and 1912), which is referred to below. [See p. 243 n. 2.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 70despised. Indeed, taken in conjunction with the interests that develop dur-
ing sleep—the stimuli that impinge on the sleeper—it might be enough toexplain the origin of all dream-images. But we have also heard the oppositeasserted, namely that dreams withdraw the sleeper from the interests ofdaytime and that, as a rule, we only start dreaming of the things that havemost struck us during the day, after they have lost the spice of actuality inwaking life. [Pp. 41 and 51.] Thus at every step we take in our analysis ofdream-life we come to feel that it is impossible to make generalizationswithout covering ourselves by such qualifying phrases as ‘frequently,’ ‘as arule’ or ‘in most cases,’ and without being prepared to admit the validityof exceptions.
If it were a fact that waking interests, along with internal and external
stimuli during sleep, sufﬁced to exhaust the aetiology of dreams, weought to be in a position to give a satisfactory account of the origin ofevery element of a dream: the riddle of the sources of dreams would besolved, and it would only remain to deﬁne the share taken respectively bypsychical and somatic stimuli in any particular dream. Actually no suchcomplete explanation of a dream has ever yet been achieved, and anyonewho has attempted it has found portions (and usually very numerous por-tions) of the dream regarding whose origin he could ﬁnd nothing to say.Daytime interests are clearly not such far-reaching psychical sources ofdreams as might have been expected from the categorical assertions thateveryone continues to carry on his daily business in his dreams.
No other psychical sources of dreams are known. So it comes about
that all the explanations of dreams given in the literature of the subject—with the possible exception of Scherner’s, which will be dealt with later[see p. 109]—leave a great gap when it comes to assigning an origin forthe ideational images which constitute the most characteristic material ofdreams. In this embarrassing situation, a majority of the writers on thesubject have tended to reduce to a minimum the part played by psychicalfactors in instigating dreams, since those factors are so hard to come at. Itis true that they divide dreams into two main classes—those ‘due to ner-vous stimulation’ and those ‘due to association,’ of which the latter havetheir source exclusively in reproduction [of material already experienced](cf. Wundt, 1874, 657 f.). Nevertheless they cannot escape a doubt‘whether any dream can take place without being given an impetus bysome somatic stimulus’ (Volkelt, 1875, 127). It is difﬁcult even to give adescription of purely associative dreams. ‘In associative dreams proper,there can be no question of any such solid core [derived from somatic71 C. The Stimuli and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 71stimulation]. Even the very centre of the dream is only loosely put to-
gether. The ideational processes, which in any dream are ungoverned byreason or common sense, are here no longer even held together by anyrelatively important somatic or mental excitations, and are thus aban-doned to their own kaleidoscopic changes and to their own jumbled con-fusion.’ (Ibid., 118.) Wundt (1874, 656–7), too, seeks to minimize thepsychical factor in the instigation of dreams. He declares that there seemsto be no justiﬁcation for regarding the phantasms of dreams as pure hal-lucinations; most dream-images are probably in fact illusions, since theyarise from faint sense-impressions, which never cease during sleep. Wey-gandt (1893, 17) has adopted this same view and made its applicationgeneral. He asserts of alldream-images ‘that their primary causes are sen-
sory stimuli and that only later do reproductive associations become at-tached to them.’ Tissié (1898, 183) goes even further in putting a limitto the psychical sources of stimulation: ‘Les rêves d’origine absolumentpsychique n’existent pas’; and (ibid., 6) ‘les pensées de nos rêves nous vi-ennent du dehors. . . . ’
1
Those writers who, like that eminent philosopher Wundt, take up a
middle position do not fail to remark that in most dreams somatic stimuliand the psychical instigators (whether unknown or recognized as daytimeinterests) work in cooperation.
We shall ﬁnd later that the enigma of the formation of dreams can be
solved by the revelation of an unsuspected psychical source of stimula-tion. Meanwhile we shall feel no surprise at the over-estimation of thepart played in forming dreams by stimuli which do not arise from mentallife. Not only are they easy to discover and even open to experimentalconﬁrmation; but the somatic view of the origin of dreams is completelyin line with the prevailing trend of thought in psychiatry today. It is truethat the dominance of the brain over the organism is asserted with appar-ent conﬁdence. Nevertheless, anything that might indicate that mentallife is in any way independent of demonstrable organic changes or that itsmanifestations are in any way spontaneous alarms the modern psychia-trist, as though a recognition of such things would inevitably bring backthe days of the Philosophy of Nature [see p. 39 n.], and of the metaphys-ical view of the nature of mind. The suspicions of the psychiatrists have72 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [‘Dreams of purely psychical origin do not exist.’ ‘The thoughts in our dreams
reach us from outside.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 72put the mind, as it were, under tutelage, and they now insist that none of
its impulses shall be allowed to suggest that it has any means of its own.This behaviour of theirs only shows how little trust they really have in thevalidity of a causal connection between the somatic and the mental. Evenwhen investigation shows that the primary exciting cause of a phenome-non is psychical, deeper research will one day trace the path further anddiscover an organic basis for the mental event. But if at the moment wecannot see beyond the mental, that is no reason for denying its existence.
1
(D)
WHY DREAMS ARE FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING
It is a proverbial fact that dreams melt away in the morning. They can,
of course, be remembered; for we only know dreams from our memoryof them after we are awake. But we very often have a feeling that we haveonly remembered a dream in part and that there was more of it duringthe night; we can observe, too, how the recollection of a dream, whichwas still lively in the morning, will melt away, except for a few small frag-ments, in the course of the day; we often know we have dreamt, withoutknowing what we have dreamt; and we are so familiar with the fact ofdreams being liable to be forgotten, that we see no absurdity in the possi-bility of someone having had a dream in the night and of his not beingaware in the morning either of what he has dreamt or even of the fact thathe has dreamt at all. On the other hand, it sometimes happens thatdreams show an extraordinary persistence in the memory. I have analyseddreams in my patients which occurred twenty-ﬁve and more years earlier;and I can remember a dream of my own separated by at least thirty-sevenyears from today and yet as fresh as ever in my memory. All of this is veryremarkable and not immediately intelligible.
The most detailed account of the forgetting of dreams is the one given
by Strümpell [1877, 79 f.]. It is evidently a complex phenomenon, forStrümpell traces it back not to a single cause but to a whole number of them.73 D. Why Dreams Are Forgotten
1 [The topics in this section are taken up again in Section C of Chapter V
(pp. 240 ff.).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 73In the ﬁrst place, all the causes that lead to forgetting in waking life are
operative for dreams as well. When we are awake we regularly forget
countless sensations and perceptions at once, because they were too weakor because the mental excitation attaching to them was too slight. Thesame holds good of many dream-images: they are forgotten because theyare too weak, while stronger images adjacent to them are remembered.The factor of intensity, however, is certainly not in itself enough to deter-mine whether a dream-image shall be recollected. Strümpell [1877, 82]admits, as well as other writers (e.g. Calkins, 1893, 312), that we often for-get dream-images which we know were very vivid, while a very large num-ber which are shadowy and lacking in sensory force are among thoseretained in the memory. Moreover when we are awake we tend easily toforget an event which occurs only once and more readily to notice whatcan be perceived repeatedly. Now most dream-images are unique experi-ences;
1and that fact will contribute impartially towards making us forget
all dreams. Far more importance attaches to a third cause of forgetting. Ifsensations, ideas, thoughts, and so on, are to attain a certain degree of sus-ceptibility to being remembered, it is essential that they should not remainisolated but should be arranged in appropriate concatenations and group-ings. If a short line of verse is divided up into its component words andthese are mixed up, it becomes very hard to remember. ‘If words are prop-erly arranged and put into the relevant order, one word will help another,and the whole, being charged with meaning, will be easily taken up by thememory and retained for a long time. It is in general as difﬁcult and un-usual to retain what is nonsensical as it is to retain what is confused anddisordered.’ [Strümpell, 1877, 83.] Now dreams are in most cases lackingin intelligibility and orderliness. The compositions which constitutedreams are barren of the qualities which would make it possible to remem-ber them, and they are forgotten because as a rule they fall to pieces a mo-ment later. Radestock (1879, 168), however, claims to have observed thatit is the most peculiar dreams that are best remembered, and this, it mustbe admitted, would scarcely tally with what has just been said.
Strümpell [1877, 82 f.] believes that certain other factors derived from
the relation between dreaming and waking life are of still greater impor-tance in causing dreams to be forgotten. The liability of dreams to be for-gotten by waking consciousness is evidently only the counterpart of the74 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 Dreams that recur periodically have often been observed. Cf. the collection given
by Chabaneix (1897). [Cf. pp. 212 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 74fact which has been mentioned earlier [p. 53] that dreams scarcely ever
take over ordered recollections from waking life, but only details selectedfrom them, which they tear from the psychical context in which they areusually remembered in the waking state. Thus dream-compositions ﬁndno place in the company of the psychical sequences with which the mindis ﬁlled. There is nothing that can help us to remember them. ‘In this waydream-structures are, as it were, lifted above the ﬂoor of our mental lifeand ﬂoat in psychical space like clouds in the sky, scattered by the ﬁrstbreath of wind.’ (Strümpell, 1877, 87.) After waking, moreover, the worldof the senses presses forward and at once takes possession of the attentionwith a force which very few dream-images can resist; so that here too wehave another factor tending in the same direction. Dreams give way beforethe impressions of a new day just as the brilliance of the stars yields to thelight of the sun.
Finally, there is another fact to be borne in mind as likely to lead to
dreams being forgotten, namely that most people take very little interestin their dreams. Anyone, such as a scientiﬁc investigator, who pays atten-tion to his dreams over a period of time will have more dreams thanusual—which no doubt means that he remembers his dreams with greaterease and frequency.
T wo further reasons why dreams should be forgotten, which Benini
[1898, 155–6] quotes as having been brought forward by Bonatelli [1880]as additions to those mentioned by Strümpell, seem in fact to be alreadycovered by the latter. They are (1) that the alteration in coenaesthesia be-tween the sleeping and waking states is unfavourable to reciprocal repro-duction between them; and (2) that the different arrangement of theideational material in dreams makes them untranslatable, as it were, forwaking consciousness.
In view of all these reasons in favour of dreams being forgotten, it is in
fact (as Strümpell himself insists [1877, 6]) very remarkable that so manyof them are retained in the memory. The repeated attempts by writers onthe subject to lay down the rules governing the recollection of dreamsamount to an admission that here too we are faced by something puzzlingand unexplained. Certain particular characteristics of the recollection ofdreams have been rightly emphasized recently (cf. Radestock, 1879, [169],and Tissié, 1898, [148 f.]), such as the fact that when a dream seems inthe morning to have been forgotten, it may nevertheless be recollectedduring the course of the day, if its content, forgotten though it is, istouched upon by some chance perception.75 D. Why Dreams Are Forgotten9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 75But the recollection of dreams in general is open to an objection which
is bound to reduce their value very completely in critical opinion. Since
so great a proportion of dreams is lost altogether, we may well doubtwhether our memory of what is left of them may not be falsiﬁed.
These doubts as to the accuracy of the reproduction of dreams are also
expressed by Strümpell (1877, [119]): ‘Thus it may easily happen thatwaking consciousness unwittingly makes interpolations in the memory ofa dream: we persuade ourselves that we have dreamt all kinds of thingsthat were not contained in the actual dreams.’
Jessen (1855, 547) writes with special emphasis on this point: ‘More-
over, in investigating and interpreting coherent and consistent dreams aparticular circumstance must be borne in mind which, as it seems to me,has hitherto received too little attention. In such cases the truth is almostalways obscured by the fact that when we recall dreams of this kind to ourmemory we almost always—unintentionally and without noticing thefact—ﬁll in the gaps in the dream-images. It is seldom or never that a co-herent dream was in fact as coherent as it seems to us in memory. Eventhe most truth-loving of men is scarcely able to relate a noteworthy dreamwithout some additions or embellishments. The tendency of the humanmind to see everything connectedly is so strong that in memory it unwit-tingly ﬁlls in any lack of coherence there may be in an incoherent dream.’
Some remarks made by Egger [1895, 41], though they were no doubt
arrived at independently, read almost like a translation of this passagefrom Jessen: ‘ . . . L’observation des rêves a ses difﬁcultés spéciales et leseul moyen d’éviter tout erreur en pareille matière est de conﬁer au papiersans le moindre retard ce que l’on vient d’éprouver et de remarquer;sinon, l’oubli vient vite ou total ou partiel; l’oubli total est sans gravité;mais l’oubli partiel est perﬁde; car si l’on se met ensuite à raconter ce quel’on n’a pas oublié, on est exposé à compléter par imagination les frag-ments incohérents et disjoints fournis par la mémoire . . . ; on devientartiste à son insu, et le récit périodiquement répété s’impose à la créancede son auteur, qui, de bonne foi, le présente comme un fait authentique,dûment établi selon les bonnes méthodes. . . . ’
176 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [‘There are peculiar difﬁculties in observing dreams, and the only way of escap-
ing all errors in such matters is to put down upon paper with the least possible
delay what we have just experienced or observed. Otherwise forgetfulness,whether total or partial, quickly supervenes. Total forgetfulness is not serious;but partial forgetfulness is treacherous. For if we then proceed to give an account9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 76Very similar ideas are expressed by Spitta (1882, 338), who seems to be-
lieve that it is not until we try to reproduce a dream that we introduce or-
der of any kind into its loosely associated elements: we ‘change things thatare merely juxtaposed into sequences or causal chains, that is to say, we in-troduce a process of logical connection which is lacking in the dream.’
Since the only check that we have upon the validity of our memory is
objective conﬁrmation, and since that is unobtainable for dreams, whichare our own personal experience and of which the only source we have isour recollection, what value can we still attach to our memory of dreams?
1
(E)
THE DISTINGUISHING PSYCHOLOGICAL
CHARACTERISTICS OF DREAMS
Our scientiﬁc consideration of dreams starts off from the assumption thatthey are products of our own mental activity. Nevertheless the ﬁnisheddream strikes us as something alien to us. We are so little obliged to ac-knowledge our responsibility for it that [in German] we are just as readyto say ‘ mir hat geträumt ’ [‘I had a dream,’ literally ‘a dream came to me’]
as ‘ich habe geträumt ’ [‘I dreamt’]. What is the origin of this feeling that
dreams are extraneous to our minds? In view of our discussion upon thesources of dreams, we must conclude that the strangeness cannot be dueto the material that ﬁnds its way into their content, since that material isfor the most part common to dreaming and waking life. The questionarises whether in dreams there may not be modiﬁcations in the processesof the mind which produce the impression we are discussing; and we shalltherefore make an attempt at drawing a picture of the psychological at-tributes of dreams.77 E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams
of what we have not forgotten, we are liable to ﬁll in from our imagination the
incoherent and disjointed fragments furnished by memory. . . . We unwittinglybecome creative artists; and the tale, if it is repeated from time to time, imposesitself on its author’s own belief, and he ends by offering it in good faith as an au-thentic fact duly and legitimately established.’]
1 [The questions raised in this section are taken up in Chapter VII, Section A
(pp. 516 ff.).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 77No one has emphasized more sharply the essential difference between
dreaming and waking life or drawn more far-reaching conclusions from
it than G. T. Fechner in a passage in his Elemente der Psychophysik (1889,
2, 520–1). In his opinion, ‘neither the mere lowering of conscious mental
life below the main threshold,’ nor the withdrawal of attention from theinﬂuences of the external world, are enough to explain the characteristicsof dream-life as contrasted with waking life. He suspects, rather, that thescene of action of dreams is different from that of waking ideational life. ‘If
the scene of action of psychophysical activity were the same in sleepingand waking, dreams could, in my view, only be a prolongation at a lowerdegree of intensity of waking ideational life and, moreover, would neces-sarily be of the same material and form. But the facts are quite otherwise.’
It is not clear what Fechner had in mind in speaking of this change of
location of mental activity; nor, so far as I know, has anyone else pursuedthe path indicated by his words. We may, I think, dismiss the possibilityof giving the phrase an anatomical interpretation and supposing it to referto physiological cerebral localization or even to the histological layers ofthe cerebral cortex. It may be, however, that the suggestion will eventuallyprove to be sagacious and fertile, if it can be applied to a mental apparatus
built up of a number of agencies arranged in a series one behind theother.
1
Other writers have contented themselves with drawing attention to
the more tangible of the distinguishing characteristics of dream-life andwith taking them as a starting-point for attempts at more far-reaching explanations.
It has justly been remarked that one of the principal peculiarities of
dream-life makes its appearance during the very process of falling asleepand may be described as a phenomenon heralding sleep. According toSchleiermacher (1862, 351), what characterizes the waking state is thefact that thought-activity takes place in concepts and not in images . Now
dreams think essentially in images; and with the approach of sleep it ispossible to observe how, in proportion as voluntary activities becomemore difﬁcult, involuntary ideas arise, all of which fall into the class ofimages. Incapacity for ideational work of the kind which we feel as inten-tionally willed and the emergence (habitually associated with such states78 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [This idea is taken up and developed in Chapter VII, Section B, of the present
work (pp. 535 ff.).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 78of abstraction) of images—these are two characteristics which persevere
in dreams and which the psychological analysis of dreams forces us to rec-ognize as essential features of dream-life. We have already seen [pp. 63 ff.]that these images—hypnagogic hallucinations—are themselves identicalin their content with dream-images.
1
Dreams, then, think predominantly in visual images—but not exclu-
sively. They make use of auditory images as well, and, to a lesser extent,of impressions belonging to the other senses. Many things, too, occur indreams (just as they normally do in waking life) simply as thoughts orideas—probably, that is to say, in the form of residues of verbal presenta-tions. Nevertheless, what are truly characteristic of dreams are only thoseelements of their content which behave like images, which are more likeperceptions, that is, than they are like mnemic presentations. Leaving onone side all the arguments, so familiar to psychiatrists, on the nature ofhallucinations, we shall be in agreement with every authority on the sub-ject in asserting that dreams hallucinate —that they replace thoughts by
hallucinations. In this respect there is no distinction between visual andacoustic presentations: it has been observed that if one falls asleep withthe memory of a series of musical notes in one’s mind, the memory be-comes transformed into an hallucination of the same melody; while, ifone then wakes up again—and the two states may alternate more thanonce during the process of dropping asleep—the hallucination gives wayin turn to the mnemic presentation, which is at once fainter and qualita-tively different from it.
The transformation of ideas into hallucinations is not the only respect
in which dreams differ from corresponding thoughts in waking life.Dreams construct a situation out of these images; they represent an event
which is actually happening; as Spitta (1882, 145) puts it, they ‘drama-tize’ an idea. But this feature of dream-life can only be fully understoodif we further recognize that in dreams—as a rule, for there are exceptionswhich require special examination—we appear not to think but to experi-
ence; that is to say, we attach complete belief to the hallucinations. Not79 E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1911:] Silberer (1909) has given some nice examples of the way
in which, in a drowsy state, even abstract thoughts become converted into picto-
rial plastic images which seek to express the same meaning. [ Added 1925:] I shall
have occasion to return to this discovery in another connection. [See pp. 358 ff.and 507 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 79until we wake up does the critical comment arise that we have not expe-
rienced anything but have merely been thinking in a peculiar way, or inother words dreaming. It is this characteristic that distinguishes truedreams from daydreaming, which is never confused with reality.
Burdach (1838, 502 f.) summarizes the features of dream-life which
we have so far discussed in the following words: ‘These are among the es-sential features of dreams: (a) In dreams the subjective activity of ourminds appears in an objective form, for our perceptive faculties regard theproducts of our imagination as though they were sense impressions. . . .(b) Sleep signiﬁes an end of the authority of the self. Hence falling asleepbrings a certain degree of passivity along with it. . . . The images that ac-company sleep can occur only on condition that the authority of the selfis reduced.’
The next thing is to try to explain the belief which the mind accords
to dream-hallucinations, a belief which can only arise after some kind of‘authoritative’ activity of the self has ceased. Strümpell (1877) argues thatin this respect the mind is carrying out its function correctly and in con-formity with its own mechanism. Far from being mere presentations, theelements of dreams are true and real mental experiences of the same kindas arise in a waking state through the agency of the senses. (Ibid., 34.)The waking mind produces ideas and thoughts in verbal images and inspeech; but in dreams it does so in true sensory images. (Ibid., 35.) More-over, there is a spatial consciousness in dreams, since sensations and im-ages are assigned to an external space, just as they are in waking. (Ibid.,36.) It must therefore be allowed that in dreams the mind is in the samerelation to its images and perceptions as it is in waking. (Ibid., 43.) If it isnevertheless in error in so doing, that is because in the state of sleep itlacks the criterion which alone makes it possible to distinguish betweensense-perceptions arising from without and from within. It is unable tosubmit its dream-images to the only tests which could prove their objec-tive reality. In addition to this, it disregards the distinction between im-ages which are only interchangeable arbitrarily and cases where the
element of arbitrariness is absent. It is in error because it is unable to ap-ply the law of causality to the content of its dreams. (Ibid., 50–1.) Inshort, the fact of its having turned away from the external world is alsothe reason for its belief in the subjective world of dreams.
Delboeuf (1885, 84) arrives at the same conclusion after somewhat
different psychological arguments. We believe in the reality of dream- images, he says, because in our sleep we have no other impressions with80 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 80which to compare them, because we are detached from the external
world. But the reason why we believe in the truth of these hallucinationsis not because it is impossible to put them to the test within the dream. A
dream can seem to offer us such tests: it can let us touch the rose that wesee—and yet we are dreaming. In Delboeuf ’s opinion there is only onevalid criterion of whether we are dreaming or awake, and that is thepurely empirical one of the fact of waking up. I conclude that everythingI experienced between falling asleep and waking up was illusory, when,on awaking, I ﬁnd that I am lying undressed in bed. During sleep I tookthe dream-images as real owing to my mental habit (which cannot be putto sleep) of assuming the existence of an external world with which I con-trast my own ego.
181 E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams
1 Haffner (1887, 243) attempts, like Delboeuf, to explain the activity of dreaming
by the modiﬁcation which the introduction of an abnormal condition must in-
evitably produce in the otherwise correct functioning of an intact mental appa-ratus; but he gives a somewhat different account of that condition. According tohim the ﬁrst mark of a dream is its independence of space and time, i.e. the factof a presentation being emancipated from the position occupied by the subjectin the spatial and temporal order of events. The second basic feature of dreamsis connected with this—namely, the fact that hallucinations, phantasies andimaginary combinations are confused with external perceptions. ‘All the higherpowers of the mind—in particular the formation of concepts and the powers ofjudgement and inference on the one hand and free self-determination on theother hand—are attached to sensory images and have at all times a backgroundof such images. It follows, therefore, that these higher activities too take theirpart in the disorderliness of the dream-images. I say “take their part,” since inthemselves our powers of judgement and of will are in no way altered in sleep.Our activities are just as clear-sighted and just as free as in waking life. Even inhis dreams a man cannot violate the laws of thought as such—he cannot, for in-stance, regard as identical things that appear to him as contraries, and so on. Sotoo in dreams he can only desire what he looks upon as a good ( sub ratione boni ).
But the human spirit is led astray in dreams in its application of the laws of
thought and of will through confusing one idea with another. Thus it comesabout that we are guilty of the grossest contradictions in dreams, while at thesame time we can make the clearest judgements, draw the most logical inferencesand come to the most virtuous and saintly decisions. . . . Lack of orientation isthe whole secret of the ﬂights taken by our imagination in dreams, and lack ofcritical reﬂection and of communication with other people is the main source ofthe unbridled extravagance exhibited in dreams by our judgements as well as byour hopes and wishes.’ (Ibid., 18.) [The problem of ‘reality-testing’ is consideredlater, on p. 566.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 81Detachment from the external world seems thus to be regarded as the
factor determining the most marked features of dream-life. It is therefore
worth while quoting some penetrating remarks made long ago by Bur-dach which throw light on the relations between the sleeping mind andthe external world and which are calculated to prevent our setting toogreat store by the conclusions drawn in the last few pages. ‘Sleep,’ hewrites, ‘can occur only on condition that the mind is not irritated by sen-sory stimuli. . . . But the actual precondition of sleep is not so much ab-sence of sensory stimuli as absence of interest in them.
1Some sense
impressions may actually be necessary in order to calm the mind. Thusthe miller can only sleep so long as he hears the clacking of his mill; andanyone who feels that burning a night-light is a necessary precaution,ﬁnds it impossible to get to sleep in the dark.’ (Burdach, 1838, 482.)
‘In sleep the mind isolates itself from the external world and with-
draws from its own periphery. . . . Nevertheless connection is not brokenoff entirely. If we could not hear or feel while we were actually asleep, butonly after we had woken up, it would be impossible to wake us at all. . . .The persistence of sensation is proved even more clearly by the fact thatwhat rouses us is not always the mere sensory strength of an impressionbut its psychical context: a sleeping man is not aroused by an indifferentword, but if he is called by name he wakes. . . . Thus the mind in sleepdistinguishes between sensations. . . . It is for that reason that the absenceof a sensory stimulus can wake a man if it is related to something ofideational importance to him; so it is that the man with the night-lightwakes if it is extinguished and the miller is roused if his mill comes to astop. He is awakened, that is, by the cessation of a sensory activity; andthis implies that that activity was perceived by him, but, since it was in-different, or rather satisfying, did not disturb his mind.’ (Ibid., 485–6.)
Even if we disregard these objections—and they are by no means tri-
ﬂing ones—we shall have to confess that the features of dream-life whichwe have considered hitherto, and which have been ascribed to its detach-ment from the external world, do not account completely for its strangecharacter. For it should be possible otherwise to turn the hallucinationsin a dream back into ideas, and its situations into thoughts, and in thatway to solve the problem of dream-interpretation. And that in fact is82 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Cf. the ‘désintérêt’ which Claparède (1905, 306 f.) re-
gards as the mechanism of falling asleep.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 82what we are doing when, after waking, we reproduce a dream from mem-
ory; but, whether we succeed in making this re-translation wholly or onlyin part, the dream remains no less enigmatic than before.
And indeed all the authorities unhesitatingly assume that yet other and
more deep-going modiﬁcations of the ideational material of waking lifetake place in dreams. Strümpell (1877, 27–8) has endeavoured to put hisﬁnger on one such modiﬁcation in the following passage: ‘With the cessa-tion of sensory functioning and of normal vital consciousness, the mindloses the soil in which its feelings, desires, interests and activities are rooted.The psychical states, too—feelings, interests, judgements of value—whichare linked to mnemic images in waking life, are subjected to . . . an obscur-ing pressure, as a result of which their connection with those images is bro-ken; perceptual images of things, persons, places, events and actions inwaking life are reproduced separately in great numbers, but none of themcarries its psychical value along with it. That value is detached from themand they thus ﬂoat about in the mind at their own sweet will. . . . ’ Accord-ing to Strümpell, the fact of images being denuded of their psychical value
(which in turn goes back to detachment from the external world) plays aprincipal part in creating the impression of strangeness which distinguishesdreams from actual life in our memory.
We have seen [cf. p. 79] that falling asleep at once involves the loss of
one of our mental activities, namely our power of giving intentional guid-ance to the sequence of our ideas. We are now faced by the suggestion,which is in any case a plausible one, that the effects of the state of sleepmay extend over all the faculties of the mind. Some of these seem to beentirely suspended; but the question now arises whether the rest continueto operate normally and whether under such conditions they are capable
of normal work. And here it may be asked whether the distinguishing features of dreams cannot be explained by the lowering of psychical efﬁciency in the sleeping state—a notion which ﬁnds support in the im-pression made by dreams on our waking judgement. Dreams are discon-nected, they accept the most violent contradictions without the leastobjection, they admit impossibilities, they disregard knowledge whichcarries great weight with us in the day-time, they reveal us as ethical andmoral imbeciles. Anyone who when he was awake behaved in the sort ofway that is shown in situations in dreams would be considered insane.Anyone who when he was awake talked in the sort of way that people talkin dreams or described the sort of thing that happens in dreams wouldgive us the impression of being muddle-headed or feeble-minded. It83 E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 83seems to be no more than putting the truth into words when we express
our very low opinion of mental activity in dreams and assert that indreams the higher intellectual faculties in particular are suspended or atall events gravely impaired.
The authorities display unusual unanimity—exceptions will be treated
later [pp. 88 ff.]—in expressing opinions of this kind on dreams; andthese judgements lead directly to a particular theory or explanation ofdream-life. But it is time for me to leave generalities and to give instead aseries of quotations from various writers—philosophers and physicians—upon the psychological characteristics of dreams.
According to Lemoine (1855), the ‘incoherence’ of dream-images is
the one essential characteristic of dreams.
Maury (1878, 163) agrees with him: ‘Il n’y a pas de rêves absolument
raisonnables et qui ne contiennent quelque incohérence, quelqueanachronisme, quelque absurdité.’
1
Spitta [1882, 193] quotes Hegel as saying that dreams are devoid of
all objectives and reasonable coherence.
Dugas [1897 a, 417] writes: ‘Le rêve c’est l’anarchie psychique affective
et mentale, c’est le jeu des fonctions livrées à ellesmêmes et s’exerçant sanscontrôle et sans but; dans le rêve l’esprit est un automate spirituel.’
2
Even Volkelt (1875, 14), whose theory is far from regarding psychical
activity during sleep as purposeless, speaks of ‘the relaxing, disconnectingand confusing of ideational life, which in the waking state is held togetherby the logical force of the central ego.’
The absurdity of the associations of ideas that occur in dreams could
scarcely be criticized more sharply than it was by Cicero ( De divinatione ,
II, [lxxi, 146]): ‘Nihil tam praepostere, tam incondite, tam monstruosecogitari potest, quod non possimus somniare.’
3
Fechner (1889, 2, 522) writes: ‘It is as though psychological activity had
been transported from the brain of a reasonable man into that of a fool.’84 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [‘There are no dreams that are absolutely reasonable and that do not contain
some incoherence, anachronism or absurdity.’]
2 [‘A dream is psychical, emotional and mental anarchy; it is the play of functions
left to their own devices and acting without control or purpose; in dreams the
spirit becomes a spiritual automaton.’]
3 [‘There is no imaginable thing too absurd, too involved, or too abnormal for us
to dream about it.’ (Falconer’s translation in the Loeb Classical Library, 1922,533.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:22 PM  Page 84Radestock (1879, 145): ‘In fact it seems impossible to detect any ﬁxed
laws in this crazy activity. After withdrawing from the strict policing ex-
ercised over the course of waking ideas by the rational will and the atten-tion, dreams melt into a mad whirl of kaleidoscopic confusion.’
Hildebrandt (1875, 45): ‘What astonishing leaps a dreamer may
make, for instance, in drawing inferences! How calmly he is prepared tosee the most familiar lessons of experience turned upside down. Whatlaughable contradictions he is ready to accept in the laws of nature andsociety before, as we say, things get beyond a joke and the excessive strainof nonsense wakes him up. We calculate without a qualm that three timesthree make twenty; we are not in the least surprised when a dog quotes aline of poetry, or when a dead man walks to his grave on his own legs, orwhen we see a rock ﬂoating on the water; we proceed gravely on an im-portant mission to the Duchy of Bernburg or to the Principality ofLiechtenstein to inspect their naval forces; or we are persuaded to enlistunder Charles XII shortly before the battle of Poltava.’
Binz (1878, 33), having in mind the theory of dreams which is based
upon such impressions as these, writes: ‘The content of at least nine out often dreams is nonsensical. We bring together in them people and thingsthat have no connection whatever with one another. Next moment thereis a shift in the kaleidoscope and we are faced by a new grouping, moresenseless and crazy, if possible, than the last. And so the changing play ofthe incompletely sleeping brain goes on, till we awake and clasp our fore-head and wonder whether we still possess the capacity for rational ideasand thoughts.’
Maury (1878, 50) ﬁnds a parallel to the relation between dream-
 images and waking thoughts which will be highly signiﬁcant to physi-cians: ‘La production de ces images que chez l’homme éveillé fait le plussouvent naître la volonté, correspond, pour l’intelligence, à ce que sontpour la motilité certains mouvements que nous offre la chorée et les af-fections paralytiques . . . ’
1He further regards dreams as ‘toute une série
de dégradations de la faculté pensante et raisonnante.’ (Ibid., 27.)285 E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams
1 [‘The production of these images (which in a waking person are usually pro-
voked by the will) corresponds in the sphere of intelligence to the place taken in
the sphere of motion by some of the movements observable in chorea and para-lytic disorders.’]
2 [‘A whole series of degradations of the thinking and reasoning faculty.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 85It is scarcely necessary to quote the writers who repeat Maury’s opinion
in relation to the various higher mental functions. Strümpell (1877, 26),
for instance, remarks that in dreams—even, of course, where there is nomanifest nonsense—there is an eclipse of all the logical operations of themind which are based on relations and connections. Spitta (1882, 148)declares that ideas that occur in dreams seem to be completely withdrawnfrom the law of causality. Radestock (1879, [153–4]) and other writers in-sist upon the weakness of judgement and inference characteristic ofdreams. According to Jodl (1896, 123), there is no critical faculty indreams, no power of correcting one set of perceptions by reference to thegeneral content of consciousness. The same author remarks that ‘everykind of conscious activity occurs in dreams, but only in an incomplete, in-hibited and isolated fashion.’ The contradictions with our waking knowl-edge in which dreams are involved are explained by Stricker (1879, 98)and many others as being due to facts being forgotten in dreams or to log-ical relations between ideas having disappeared. And so on, and so on.
Nevertheless, the writers who in general take so unfavourable a view
of psychical functioning in dreams allow that a certain remnant of mentalactivity still remains in them. This is explictly admitted by Wundt, whosetheories have had a determining inﬂuence on so many other workers inthis ﬁeld. What, it may be asked, is the nature of the remnant of normalmental activity which persists in dreams? There is fairly general agree-ment that the reproductive faculty, the memory, seems to have sufferedleast, and indeed that it shows a certain superiority to the same functionin waking life (see Section B above), though some part of the absurditiesof dreaming seems to be explicable by its forgetfulness. In the opinion ofSpitta (1882, 84 f.) the part of the mind which is not affected by sleep isthe life of the sentiments and it is this which directs dreams. By ‘senti-ment’ [‘Gemüt’ ] he means ‘the stable assemblage of feelings which con-
stitutes the innermost subjective essence of a human being.’
Scholz (1893, 64) believes that one of the mental activities operating
in dreams is a tendency to subject the dream-material to ‘re-interpretationin allegorical terms.’ Siebeck too (1877, 11) sees in dreams a faculty ofthe mind for ‘wider interpretation,’ which is exercised upon all sensationsand perceptions. There is particular difﬁculty in assessing the position indreams of what is ostensibly the highest of the psychical functions, thatof consciousness. Since all that we know of dreams is derived from con-sciousness, there can be no doubt of its persisting in them; yet Spitta(1882, 84–5) believes that what persists in dreams is only consciousness86 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 86and not self -consciousness. Delboeuf (1885, 19), however, confesses that
he is unable to follow the distinction.
The laws of association governing the sequence of ideas hold good
of dream-images, and indeed their dominance is even more clearly and
strongly expressed in dreams. ‘Dreams,’ says Strümpell (1877, 70), ‘runtheir course, as it seems, according to the laws either of bare ideas or of or-ganic stimuli accompanying such ideas—that is, without being in any wayaffected by reﬂection or commonsense or aesthetic taste or moral judge-ment.’ [See pp. 83 f. and 242.]
The authors whose views I am now giving picture the process of form-
ing dreams in some such way as this. The totality of the sensory stimuligenerated during sleep from the various sources which I have already enu-merated [see Section C above] arouse in the mind in the ﬁrst place anumber of ideas, which are represented in the form of hallucinations ormore properly, according to Wundt [see p. 71], of illusions, in view oftheir derivation from external and internal stimuli. These ideas becomelinked together according to the familiar laws of association and, accord-ing to the same laws, call up a further series of ideas (or images). Thewhole of this material is then worked over, so far as it will allow, by whatstill remain in operation of the organizing and thinking faculties of themind. (See, for instance, Wundt [1874, 658] and Weygandt [1893].) Allthat remain undiscovered are the motives which decide whether the calling-up of images arising from non-external sources shall proceed alongone chain of associations or another.
It has often been remarked, however, that the associations connecting
dream-images with one another are of a quite special kind and differ fromthose which operate in waking thought. Thus Volkelt (1875, 15) writes:‘In dreams the associations seem to play at catch-as-catch-can in accor-dance with chance similarities and connections that are barely perceptible.Every dream is stuffed full of slovenly and perfunctory associations of thiskind.’ Maury (1878, 126) attaches very great importance to this feature ofthe way in which ideas are linked in dreams, since it enables him to drawa close analogy between dream-life and certain mental disorders. He spec-iﬁes two main features of a ‘ délire’: ‘(1) une action spontanée et comme au-
tomatique de l’esprit; (2) une association vicieuse et irrégulière des idées.’
187 E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams
1 [‘(1) A mental act which is spontaneous and as it were automatic; (2) an invalid
and irregular association of ideas.’—N.B. In French (and similarly in German)
psychiatry ‘ délire’ has the meaning of a delusional state.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 87Maury himself gives two excellent instances of dreams of his own in which
dream-images were linked together merely through a similarity in thesound of words. He once dreamt that he was on a pilgrimage ( pélerinage)
to Jerusalem or Mecca; after many adventures he found himself visitingPelletier, the chemist, who, after some conversation, gave him a zinc shovel
(pelle); in the next part of the dream this turned into a great broad-sword.
(Ibid., 137.) In another dream he was walking along a highway and read-ing the number of kilometres on the milestones; then he was in a grocer’s
shop where there was a big pair of scales, and a man was putting kilo-gramme weights into the scale in order to weigh Maury; the grocer thensaid to him: ‘You’re not in Paris but on the island of Gilolo .’ Several other
scenes followed, in which he saw a Lobelia ﬂower, and then General Lopez,
of whose death he had read shortly before. Finally, while he was playing agame of lo tto, he woke up. (Ibid., 126.)
1
We shall no doubt be prepared to ﬁnd, however, that this low estimate
of psychical functioning in dreams has not been allowed to pass withoutcontradiction—though contradiction on this point would seem to be noeasy matter. For instance, Spitta (1882, 118), one of the disparagers ofdream-life, insists that the same psychological laws which regulate wakinglife also hold good in dreams; and another, Dugas (1897 a), declares that
‘le rêve n’est pas déraison ni même irraison pure.’
2But such assertions
carry little weight so long as their authors make no attempt to reconcilethem with their own descriptions of the psychical anarchy and disruptionof every function that prevail in dreams. It seems, however, to havedawned upon some other writers that the madness of dreams may not bewithout method and may even be simulated, like that of the Danishprince on whom this shrewd judgement was passed. These latter writerscannot have judged by appearances; or the appearance presented to themby dreams must have been a different one.
Thus Havelock Ellis (1899, 721), without dwelling on the apparent
absurdity of dreams, speaks of them as ‘an archaic world of vast emotionsand imperfect thoughts,’ the study of which might reveal to us primitivestages in the evolution of mental life.88 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1909:] At a later stage [p. 534 n. 1] we shall come to understand
the meaning of dreams such as this which are ﬁlled with alliterations and  similar-
sounding ﬁrst syllables.
2 [‘Dreams are not contrary to reason or even entirely lacking in reason.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 88The same view1is expressed by James Sully (1893, 362) in a manner
that is both more sweeping and more penetrating. His words deserve all
the more attention when we bear in mind that he was more ﬁrmly con-vinced, perhaps, than any other psychologist that dreams have a disguisedmeaning. ‘Now our dreams are a means of conserving these successive[earlier] personalities. When asleep we go back to the old ways of looking at
things and of feeling about them, to impulses and activities which long agodominated us.’
The sagacious Delboeuf (1885, 222) declares (though he puts himself
in the wrong by not giving any refutation of the material which contra-dicts his thesis): ‘Dans le sommeil, hormis la perception, toutes les fac-ultés de l’esprit, intelligence, imagination, mémoire, volonté, moralité,restent intactes dans leur essence; seulement elles s’appliquent à des objetsimaginaires et mobiles. Le songeur est un acteur qui joue à volonté lesfous et les sages, les bourreaux et les victimes, les nains et les géants, lesdémons et les anges.’
2
The most energetic opponent of those who seek to depreciate psychi-
cal functioning in dreams seems to be the Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denys [1867], with whom Maury carried on a lively controversy, andwhose book, in spite of all my efforts, I have not succeeded in procuring.
3
Maury (1878, 19) writes of him: ‘M. le Marquis d’Hervey prête à l’intel-ligence durant le sommeil, toute sa liberté d’action et d’attention et il nesemble faire consister le sommeil que dans l’occlusion des sens, dans leurfermeture au monde extérieur; en sorte que l’homme qui dort ne se dis-tingue guère, selon sa manière de voir, de l’homme qui laisse vaguer sapensée en se bouchant les sens; toute la différence qui sépare alors la pen-sée ordinaire de celle du dormeur c’est que, chez celui-ci, l’idée prend uneforme visible, objective et ressemble, à s’y méprendre, à la sensation déter-minée par les objets extérieurs; le souvenir revêt l’apparence du fait89 E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams
1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.]
2 [‘In sleep, all the mental faculties (except for perception)—intelligence, imagi-
nation, memory, will and morality—remain essentially intact; they are merely
applied to imaginary and unstable objects. A dreamer is an actor who at his ownwill plays the parts of madmen and philosophers, of executioners and their vic-tims, of dwarfs and giants, of demons and angels.’]
3 [This work, by a famous sinologist, was published anonymously.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 89présent.’1To this Maury adds ‘qu’il y a une différence de plus et capitale
à savoir que les facultés intellectuelles de l’homme endormi n’offrent pas
l’équilibre qu’elles gardent chez l’homme éveillé.’2
Vaschide (1911, 146 f.)3gives us a clearer account of Hervey de Saint-
Denys’ book and quotes a passage from it [1867, 35] upon the apparentincoherence of dreams: ‘L’image du rêve est la copie de l’idée. Le princi-pal est l’idée; la vision n’est qu’accessoire. Ceci établi, il faut savoir suivrela marche des idées, il faut savoir analyser le tissu des rêves; l’incohérencedevient alors compréhensible, les conceptions les plus fantasques devien-nent des faits simples et parfaitement logiques. . . . Les rêves les plusbizarres trouvent même une explication des plus logiques quand on saitles analyser.’
4
Johan Stärcke (1913, 243) has pointed out that a similar explanation
of the incoherence of dreams was put forward by an earlier writer, WolfDavidson (1799, 136), whose work was unknown to me: ‘The remark-able leaps taken by our ideas in dreams all have their basis in the law ofassociation; sometimes, however, these connections occur in the mindvery obscurely, so that our ideas often seem to have taken a leap when infact there has been none.’90 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [‘The Marquis d’Hervey attributes complete liberty of action and attention to
the intelligence during sleep, and he seems to think that sleep consists merely in
the blocking of the senses, in their being closed to the external world. So that onhis view a sleeping man would hardly be different from a man who shut off hissenses and allowed his thoughts to wander; the only distinction between ordi-nary thoughts and those of a sleeper would be that, in the latter, ideas assume avisible and objective shape and are indistinguishable from sensations determinedby external objects, while memories take on the appearance of present events.’]
2 [‘There is a further distinction and one of capital importance: namely, that the
intellectual faculties of a sleeping man do not exhibit the balance maintained ina man who is awake.’]
3 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1914.]
4 [‘Dream-images are copies of ideas. The essential thing is the idea, the vision is
a mere accessory. When this is once established, we must know how to followthe sequence of the ideas, we must know how to analyse the texture of dreams;their incoherence then becomes intelligible, and the most fantastic notions be-come simple and perfectly logical facts. . . . We can even ﬁnd a most logical ex-planation for the strangest dreams if we know how to analyse them.’—This isnot in fact a verbatim quotation from Hervey de Saint-Denys, but a paraphraseby Vaschide.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 90The literature of the subject thus shows a very wide range of variation
in the value which it assigns to dreams as psychical products. This range
extends from the deepest disparagement, of the kind with which we havebecome familiar, through hints at a yet undisclosed worth, to an overval-uation which ranks dreams far higher than any of the functions of wakinglife. Hildebrandt (1875, 19 f.), who, as we have heard [see above, p. 43],has summed up the whole of the psychological features of dream-life inthree antinomies, makes use of the two extreme ends of this range of val-ues for his third paradox: ‘it is a contrast between an intensiﬁcation ofmental life, an enhancement of it that not infrequently amounts to virtu-osity, and, on the other hand, a deterioration and enfeeblement which of-ten sinks below the level of humanity. As regards the former, there are fewof us who could not afﬁrm, from our own experience, that there emergesfrom time to time in the creations and fabrics of the genius of dreams adepth and intimacy of emotion, a tenderness of feeling, a clarity of vision,a subtlety of observation, and a brilliance of wit such as we should neverclaim to have at our permanent command in our waking lives. There liesin dreams a marvellous poetry, an apt allegory, an incomparable humour,a rare irony. A dream looks upon the world in a light of strange idealismand often enhances the effects of what it sees by its deep understandingof their essential nature. It pictures earthly beauty to our eyes in a trulyheavenly splendour and clothes dignity with the highest majesty, it showsus our everyday fears in the ghastliest shape and turns our amusementinto jokes of indescribable pungency. And sometimes, when we are awakeand still under the full impact of an experience like one of these, we can-not but feel that never in our life has the real world offered us its equal.’
We may well ask whether the disparaging remarks quoted on earlier
pages and this enthusiastic eulogy can possibly relate to the same thing.Is it that some of our authorities have overlooked the nonsensical dreamsand others the profound and subtle ones? And if dreams of both kinds oc-cur, dreams that justify both estimates, may it not be a waste of time tolook for any distinguishing psychological feature of dreams? Will it notbe enough to say that in dreams anything is possible—from the deepest
degradation of mental life to an exaltation of it which is rare in wakinghours? However convenient a solution of this kind might be, what liesagainst it is the fact that all of the efforts at research into the problem ofdreams seem to be based on a conviction that some distinguishing featuredoes exist, which is universally valid in its essential outline and whichwould clear these apparent contradictions out of the way.91 E. Psychological Characteristics of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 91There can be no doubt that the psychical achievements of dreams re-
ceived readier and warmer recognition during the intellectual period
which has now been left behind, when the human mind was dominatedby philosophy and not by the exact natural sciences. Pronouncementssuch as that by Schubert (1814, 20 f.) that dreams are a liberation of thespirit from the power of external nature, a freeing of the soul from thebonds of the senses, and similar remarks by the younger Fichte (1864, 1,
143 f.)
1and others, all of which represent dreams as an elevation of men-
tal life to a higher level, seem to us now to be scarcely intelligible; todaythey are repeated only by mystics and pietists.
2The introduction of the
scientiﬁc mode of thought has brought along with it a reaction in the es-timation of dreams. Medical writers in especial tend to regard psychicalactivity in dreams as trivial and valueless; while philosophers and non-professional observers—amateur psychologists—whose contributions tothis particular subject are not to be despised, have (in closer alignmentwith popular feeling) retained a belief in the psychical value of dreams.Anyone who is inclined to take a low view of psychical functioning indreams will naturally prefer to assign their source to somatic stimulation;whereas those who believe that the dreaming mind retains the greater partof its waking capacities have of course no reason for denying that thestimulus to dreaming can arise within the dreaming mind itself.
Of the superior faculties which even a sober comparison may be in-
clined to attribute to dream-life, the most marked is that of memory; wehave already [in Section B above] discussed at length the not uncommonevidence in favour of this view. Another point of superiority in dream-life, often praised by earlier writers—that it rises superior to distance intime and space—may easily be shown to have no basis in fact. As Hilde-brandt (1875, [25]) points out, this advantage is an illusory one; fordreaming rises superior to time and space in precisely the same way asdoes waking thought, and for the very reason that it is merely a form ofthought. It has been claimed for dreams that they enjoy yet another ad-vantage over waking life in relation to time—that they are independentof the passage of time in yet another respect. Dreams such as the one92 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 Cf. Haffner (1887) and Spitta (1882, 11 f.).
2 [Footnote added 1914:] That brilliant mystic Du Prel, one of the few authors for
whose neglect in earlier editions of this book I should wish to express my regret,
declares that the gateway to metaphysics, so far as men are concerned, lies notin waking life but in the dream. (Du Prel, 1885, 59.)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 92dreamt by Maury of his own guillotining (see above, p. 58) seem to show
that a dream is able to compress into a very short space of time anamount of perceptual matter far greater than the amount of ideationalmatter that can be dealt with by our waking mind. This conclusion hashowever been countered by various arguments; since the papers by LeLorrain (1894) and Egger (1895) on the apparent duration of dreams, along and interesting discussion on the subject has developed, but it seemsunlikely that the last word has yet been said on this subtle question andthe deep implications which it involves.
1
Reports of numerous cases as well as the collection of instances made
by Chabaneix (1897) seem to put it beyond dispute that dreams can carryon the intellectual work of daytime and bring it to conclusions which hadnot been reached during the day, and that they can resolve doubts andproblems and be the source of new inspiration for poets and musicalcomposers. But though the fact may be beyond dispute, its implicationsare open to many doubts, which raise matters of principle.
2
Lastly, dreams are reputed to have the power of divining the future.
Here we have a conﬂict in which almost insuperable scepticism is met byobstinately repeated assertions. No doubt we shall be acting rightly in notinsisting that this view has no basis at all in fact, since it is possible thatbefore long a number of the instances cited may ﬁnd an explanationwithin the bounds of natural psychology.
3
(F)
THE MORAL SENSE IN DREAMS
For reasons which will only become apparent after my own investiga-
tions into dreams have been taken into account, I have isolated from thesubject of the psychology of dreams the special problem of whether and93 F . The Moral Sense in Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] A further bibliography and a critical discussion of these
problems will be found in Tobowolska (1900). [Cf. also pp. 500 f.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] Cf. the criticism in Havelock Ellis (1911, 265). [See also
below, p. 563 f.]
3 [Cf. the posthumously published paper by Freud (1941c) printed as an Appen-
dix at the end of this work (p. 617).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 93to what extent moral dispositions and feelings extend into dream-life.
Here too we are met by the same contradictory views which, curiouslyenough, we have found adopted by different authors in regard to all theother functions of the mind during dreams. Some assert that the dictatesof morality have no place in dreams, while others maintain no less posi-tively that the moral character of man persists in his dream-life.
Appeal to the common experience of dreams seems to establish be-
yond any doubt the correctness of the former of these views. Jessen(1855, 553) writes: ‘Nor do we become better or more virtuous in sleep.On the contrary, conscience seems to be silent in dreams, for we feel nopity in them and may commit the worst crimes—theft, violence andmurder—with complete indifference and with no subsequent feelings ofremorse.’
Radestock (1879, 164): ‘It should be borne in mind that associations
occur and ideas are linked together in dreams without any regard for re-ﬂection, common sense, aesthetic taste or moral judgement. Judgementis extremely weak and ethical indifference reigns supreme.’
Volkelt (1875, 23): ‘In dreams, as we are all aware, proceedings are es-
pecially unbridled in sexual matters. The dreamer himself is utterlyshameless and devoid of any moral feeling or judgement; moreover, hesees everyone else, including those for whom he has the deepest respect,engaged in acts with which he would be horriﬁed to associate them whilehe was awake, even in his thoughts.’
In diametrical opposition to these, we ﬁnd statements such as
Schopenhauer’s [1862, 1, 245] that everyone who ﬁgures in a dream actsand speaks in complete accordance with his character. K. P . Fischer(1850, 72 f.), quoted by Spitta (1882, 188), declares that subjective feel-ings and longings, or affects and passions, reveal themselves in the free-dom of dream-life, and that people’s moral characteristics are reﬂected intheir dreams.
Haffner (1884, 251): ‘With rare exceptions . . . a virtuous man will be
virtuous in his dreams as well; he will resist temptations and will keephimself aloof from hatred, envy, anger and all other vices. But a sinfulman will as a rule ﬁnd in his dreams the same images that he had beforehis eyes while he was awake.’
Scholz [Jewett’s translation, 1893, 62]: ‘In dreams is truth: in dreams
we learn to know ourselves as we are in spite of all the disguises we wearto the world, [whether they be ennobling or humiliating]. . . . The hon-ourable man cannot commit a crime in dreams, or if he does he is horri-94 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 94ﬁed over it as over something contrary to his nature. The Roman Em-
peror who put a man to death who had dreamt that he had assassinatedthe ruler, was justiﬁed in so doing if he reasoned that the thoughts onehas in dreams, one has, too, when awake. The common expression “Iwouldn’t dream of such a thing” has a doubly correct signiﬁcance whenit refers to something which can have no lodgement in our hearts ormind.’ (Plato, on the contrary, thought that the best men are those whoonly dream what other men do in their waking life.)
1
Pfaff (1868, [9]), quoted by Spitta (1882, 192), alters the wording of
a familiar saying: ‘Tell me some of your dreams, and I will tell you aboutyour inner self.’
The problem of morality in dreams is taken as the centre of interest by
Hildebrandt, from whose small volume I have already quoted so much—for, of all the contributions to the study of dreams which I have comeacross, it is the most perfect in form and the richest in ideas. Hildebrandt[1875, 54] too lays it down as a rule that the purer the life the purer thedream, and the more impure the one the more impure the other. He be-lieves that man’s moral nature persists in dreams. ‘Whereas,’ he writes,‘even the grossest mistake in arithmetic, even the most romantic reversalof scientiﬁc laws, even the most ridiculous anachronism fails to upset usor even to arouse our suspicions, yet we never lose sight of the distinctionbetween good and evil, between right and wrong or between virtue andvice. However much of what accompanies us in the daytime may dropaway in our sleeping hours, Kant’s categorical imperative is a companionwho follows so close at our heels that we cannot be free of it even insleep. . . . But this can only be explained by the fact that what is funda-mental in man’s nature, his moral being, is too ﬁrmly ﬁxed to be affectedby the kaleidoscopic shufﬂing to which the imagination, the reason, thememory and other such faculties must submit in dreams.’ (Ibid., 45 f.)
As the discussion of this subject proceeds, however, both groups of
writers begin to exhibit remarkable shifts and inconsistencies in their opin-ions. Those who maintain that the moral personality of man ceases to op-erate in dreams should, in strict logic, lose all interest in immoral dreams.They could rule out any attempt at holding a dreamer responsible for hisdreams, or at deducing from the wickedness of his dreams that he had an95 F . The Moral Sense in Dreams
1 [This sentence was added in 1914. Cf. also p. 614. The reference is no doubt to
the opening sections of Book IX of the Republic. (Trans. , 1871, 409 f.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 95evil streak in his character, just as conﬁdently as they would reject a similar
attempt at deducing from the absurdity of his dreams that his intellectualactivities in waking life were worthless. The other group, who believe thatthe ‘categorical imperative’ extends to dreams, should logically accept un-qualiﬁed responsibility for immoral dreams. We could only hope for theirsake that they would have no such reprehensible dreams of their own toupset their ﬁrm belief in their own moral character.
It appears, however, that no one is as conﬁdent as all that of how far
he is good or bad, and that no one can deny the recollection of immoraldreams of his own. For writers in both groups, irrespective of the opposi-tion between their opinions on dream-morality, make efforts at explain-ing the origin of immoral dreams; and a fresh difference of opiniondevelops, according as their origin is sought in the functions of the mindor in deleterious effects produced on the mind by somatic causes. Thusthe compelling logic of facts forces the supporters of both the responsi-bility and the irresponsibility of dream-life to unite in recognizing thatthe immorality of dreams has a speciﬁc psychical source.
Those who believe that morality extends to dreams are, however, all
careful to avoid assuming complete responsibility for their dreams. Thus
Haffner (1887, 250) writes: ‘We are not responsible for our dreams, sinceour thought and will have been deprived in them of the basis upon whichalone our life possesses truth and reality . . . For that reason no dream-wishes or dream-actions can be virtuous or sinful.’ Nevertheless, he goeson, men are responsible for their sinful dreams in so far as they causethem indirectly. They have the duty of morally cleansing their minds notonly in their waking life but more especially before going to sleep.
Hildebrandt [1875, 48 f.] presents us with a far deeper analysis of this
mingled rejection and acceptance of responsibility for the moral contentof dreams. He argues that in considering the immoral appearance ofdreams allowance must be made for the dramatic form in which they arecouched, for their compression of the most complicated processes of re-ﬂection into the briefest periods of time, as well as for the way in which,as even he admits, the ideational elements of dreams become confusedand deprived of their signiﬁcance. He confesses that he has the greatesthesitation, nevertheless, in thinking that all responsibility for sins andfaults in dreams can be repudiated.
‘When we are anxious to disown some unjust accusation, especially
one that relates to our aims and intentions, we often use the phrase “Ishould never dream of such a thing.” We are in that way expressing, on96 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 96the one hand, our feeling that the region of dreams is the most remote
and furthest in which we are answerable for our thoughts, since thoughtsin that region are so loosely connected with our essential self that they arescarcely to be regarded as ours; but nevertheless, since we feel obliged ex-pressly to deny the existence of these thoughts in this region, we are at thesame time admitting indirectly that our self-justiﬁcation would not becomplete unless it extended so far. And I think that in this we are speak-ing, although unconsciously, the language of truth.’ (Ibid., 49.)
‘It is impossible to think of any action in a dream for which the original
motive has not in some way or other—whether as a wish, or desire or impulse—passed through the waking mind.’ We must admit, Hildebrandtproceeds, that this original impulse was not invented by the dream; thedream merely copied it and spun it out, it merely elaborated in dramaticform a scrap of historical material which it had found in us; it merelydramatized the Apostle’s words: ‘Whosoever hateth his brother is a mur-derer.’ [1 John iii, 15.] And although after we have awoken, conscious ofour moral strength, we may smile at the whole elaborate structure of thesinful dream, yet the original material from which the structure was de-rived will fail to raise a smile. We feel responsible for the dreamer’s errors—not for the whole amount of them, but for a certain percentage.‘In short, if we understand in this scarcely disputable sense Christ’s sayingthat “out of the heart proceed evil thoughts” [Matt. xv, 19], we can hardlyescape the conviction that a sin committed in a dream bears with it at leastan obscure minimum of guilt.’ (Hildebrandt, 1875, 51 ff.)
Thus Hildebrandt ﬁnds the source of immorality in dreams in the germs
and hints of evil impulses which, in the form of temptations, pass throughour minds during the day; and he does not hesitate to include these im-moral elements in his estimate of a person’s moral value. These samethoughts, as we know, and this same estimate of them, are what have ledthe pious and saintly in every age to confess themselves miserable sinners.
1
There can of course be no doubt as to the general existence of such in-
compatible ideas; they occur in most people and in spheres other than97 F . The Moral Sense in Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] It is of some interest to learn the attitude of the Inquisi-
tion to our problem. In Caesar Careña’s Tractatus de Ofﬁcio sanctissimae lnquisi-
tionis, 1659, the following passage occurs: ‘If anyone speaks heresies in a dream,
the inquisitors should take occasion to enquire into his way of life, for what oc-cupies a man during the day is wont to come again in his sleep.’ (Communi-cated by Dr. Ehniger, St. Urban, Switzerland.)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 97that of ethics. Sometimes, however, they have been judged less seriously.
Spitta (1882, 194) quotes some remarks by Zeller [1818, 120–1], whichare relevant in this connection: ‘A mind is seldom so happily organized asto possess complete power at every moment and not to have the regularand clear course of its thoughts constantly interrupted not only byinessential but by positively grotesque and nonsensical ideas. Indeed, thegreatest thinkers have had to complain of this dreamlike, teasing and tor-menting rabble of ideas, which have disturbed their deepest reﬂectionsand their most solemn and earnest thoughts.’
A more revealing light is thrown upon the psychological position of
these incompatible thoughts by another remark of Hildebrandt’s (1875,55), to the effect that dreams give us an occasional glimpse into depths andrecesses of our nature to which we usually have no access in our wakingstate. Kant expresses the same idea in a passage in his Anthropologie [1798]
1
in which he declares that dreams seem to exist in order to show us our hid-den natures and to reveal to us, not what we are, but what we might havebeen if we had been brought up differently. Radestock (1879, 84), too, saysthat dreams often do no more than reveal to us what we would not admitto ourselves and that it is therefore unfair of us to stigmatize them as liarsand deceivers. Erdmann [1852, 115] writes: ‘Dreams have never shown mewhat I ought to think of a man; but I have occasionally learnt from adream, greatly to my own astonishment, what I dothink of a man and how
I feel towards him.’ Similarly I. H. Fichte (1864, 1, 539) remarks: ‘The na-
ture of our dreams gives a far more truthful reﬂection of our whole disposi-tion than we are able to learn of it from self-observation in waking life.’
2
It will be seen that the emergence of impulses which are foreign to our
moral consciousness is merely analogous to what we have already learnt—the fact that dreams have access to ideational material which is absent inour waking state or plays but a small part in it. Thus Benini (1898) writes:‘Certe nostre inclinazioni che si credevano soffocate e spente da un pezzo,si ridestano; passioni vecchie e sepolte rivivono; cose e persone a cui nonpensiamo mai, ci vengono dinanzi.’
3And Volkelt (1875, 105): ‘Ideas, too,
which have entered waking consciousness almost unnoticed and have per-98 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Not traceable.]
2 [The last two sentences were added in 1914.]
3 [‘Certain of our desires which have seemed for a time to be stiﬂed and extin-
guished are re-awakened; old and buried passions come to life again; things and
persons of whom we never think appear before us.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 98haps never again been called to memory, very frequently announce their
presence in the mind through dreams.’ At this point, ﬁnally, we may recallSchleiermacher’s assertion [see above, p. 78] that the act of falling asleepis accompanied by the appearance of ‘involuntary ideas’ or images.
We may, then, class together under the heading of ‘involuntary ideas’
the whole of the ideational material the emergence of which, alike in im-moral and in absurd dreams, causes us so much bewilderment. There is,however, one important point of difference: involuntary ideas in themoral sphere contradict our usual attitude of mind, whereas the othersmerely strike us as strange. No step has yet been taken towards a deeperknowledge which would resolve this distinction.
The question next arises as to the signiﬁcance of the appearance of in-
voluntary ideas in dreams, as to the light which the emergence during thenight of these morally incompatible impulses throws upon the psychologyof the waking and dreaming mind. And here we ﬁnd a fresh division ofopinion and yet another different grouping of the authorities. The line ofthought adopted by Hildebrandt and others who share his fundamentalposition inevitably leads to the view that immoral impulses possess a cer-tain degree of power even in waking life, though it is an inhibited power,unable to force its way into action, and that in sleep something is put outof action which acts like an inhibition in the daytime and has preventedus from being aware of the existence of such impulses. Thus dreams wouldreveal the true nature of man, though not his whole nature, and theywould constitute one means of rendering the hidden interior of the mindaccessible to our knowledge. Only upon some such premises as these canHildebrandt [1875, 56] base his attribution to dreams of warning powers,which draw our attention to moral inﬁrmities in our mind, just as physi-cians admit that dreams can bring unobserved physical illnesses to ourconscious notice. So, too, Spitta must be adopting this view when, inspeaking [1882, 193 f.] of the sources of excitation which impinge uponthe mind (at puberty, for instance), he consoles the dreamer with the as-surance that he will have done all that lies within his power if he leads astrictly virtuous life in his waking hours, and if he takes care to suppresssinful thoughts whenever they arise and to prevent their maturing andturning into acts. According to this view we might deﬁne the ‘involuntaryideas’ as ideas which had been ‘suppressed’ during the day, and we shouldhave to regard their emergence as a genuine mental phenomenon.
Other writers, however, regard this last conclusion as unjustiﬁable. Thus
Jessen (1855) believes that involuntary ideas, both in dreams and in waking,99 F . The Moral Sense in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 99and in feverish and other delirious conditions, ‘have the character of a voli-
tional activity that has been put to rest and of a more or less mechanical suc-cession of images and ideas provoked by internal impulses.’ All that animmoral dream proves as to the dreamer’s mental life is, in Jessen’s view, thaton some occasion he had cognizance of the ideational content in question;it is certainly no evidence of a mental impulse of the dreamer’s own.
As regards another writer, Maury, it would almost seem as though he
too attributes to the dreaming condition a capacity, not for the arbitrarydestruction of mental activity, but for analysing it into its components.He writes as follows of dreams which transgress the bounds of morality:‘Ce sont nos penchants qui parlent et qui nous font agir, sans que la con-science nous retienne, bien que parfois elle nous avertisse. J’ai mes défautset mes penchants vicieux; à l’état de veille je tâche de lutter contre eux, etil m’arrive assez souvent de n’y pas succomber. Mais dans mes songes j’ysuccombe toujours ou pour mieux dire j’agis par leur impulsion, sanscrainte et sans remords. . . . Evidemment les visions qui se déroulent de-vant ma pensée et qui constituent le rêve, me sont suggérées par les inci-tations que je ressens et que ma volonté absente ne cherche pas à refouler.’(Maury, 1878, 113.)
1
No one who believes in the capacity of dreams to reveal an immoral
tendency of the dreamer’s which is really present though suppressed orconcealed, could express his view more precisely than in Maury’s words:‘En rêve l’homme se révèle donc tout entier à soi-même dans sa nudité etsa misère natives. Dès qu’il suspend l’exercice de sa volonté, il devient lejouet de toutes les passions contres lesquelles, à l’état de veille, la con-science, le sentiment de l’honneur, la crainte nous défendent.’ (Ibid.,165.)
2In another passage we ﬁnd these pertinent sentences: ‘Dans le100 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [‘It is our impulses that are speaking and making us act, while our conscience
does not hold us back, though it sometimes warns us. I have my faults and my
vicious impulses; while I am awake I try to resist them, and quite often I succeedin not yielding to them. But in my dreams I always yield to them, or rather I act
under their pressure without fear or remorse. . . . The visions which unroll be-fore my mind and which constitute a dream are clearly suggested by the urgeswhich I feel and which my absent will does not attempt to repress.’]
2 [‘Thus in dreams a man stands self-revealed in all his native nakedness and
poverty. As soon as he suspends the exercise of his will, he becomes the playthingof all the passions against which he is defended while he is awake by his con-science, his sense of honour and his fears.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 100songe, c’est surtout l’homme instinctif qui se révèle. . . . L’homme revient
pour ainsi dire à l’état de nature quand il rêve; mais moins les idées ac-quises ont pénétré dans son esprit, plus les penchants en désaccord avecelles conservent encore sur lui l’inﬂuence dans le rêve.’ (Ibid., 462.)
1He
goes on to relate by way of example how in his dreams he is not infre-quently the victim of the very superstition which he has been attackingin his writings with particular vehemence.
These penetrating reﬂections of Maury’s, however, lose their value in
the investigation of dream-life owing to the fact that he regards the phe-nomena which he has observed with such accuracy as no more thanproofs of an ‘ automatisme psychologique ’ which, in his view, dominates
dreams and which he looks upon as the exact opposite of mental activity.
Stricker (1879, [51]) writes: ‘Dreams do not consist solely of illusions.
If, for instance, one is afraid of robbers in a dream, the robbers, it is true,are imaginary—but the fear is real.’ This calls our attention to the factthat affects in dreams cannot be judged in the same way as the remainder
of their content; and we are faced by the problem of what part of the psy-chical processes occurring in dreams is to be regarded as real, that is to say,has a claim to be classed among the psychical processes of waking life.
2
(G)
THEORIES OF DREAMING AND ITS FUNCTION
Any disquisition upon dreams which seeks to explain as many as possibleof their observed characteristics from a particular point of view, andwhich at the same time deﬁnes the position occupied by dreams in awider sphere of phenomena, deserves to be called a theory of dreams. Thevarious theories will be found to differ in that they select one or the other101 G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function
1 [‘What is revealed in dreams is primarily the man of instinct. . . . Man may be
said to return in his dreams to a state of nature. But the less his mind has been
penetrated by acquired ideas, the more it remains inﬂuenced in dreams by im-pulses of a contrary nature.’]
2 [The question of affects in dreams is discussed in Section H of Chapter VI
(pp. 466 ff.). The whole topic of moral responsibility for dreams is touched uponbelow on pp. 613 f. and considered at greater length in Section B of Freud 1925i .]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 101characteristic of dreams as the essential one and take it as the point of de-
parture for their explanations and correlations. It need not necessarily bepossible to infer a function of dreaming (whether utilitarian or otherwise)
from the theory. Nevertheless, since we have a habit of looking for teleo-logical explanations, we shall be more ready to accept theories which arebound up with the attribution of a function to dreaming.
We have already made the acquaintance of several sets of views which
deserve more or less to be called theories of dreams in this sense of theterm. The belief held in antiquity that dreams were sent by the gods in or-der to guide the actions of men was a complete theory of dreams, givinginformation on everything worth knowing about them. Since dreams havebecome an object of scientiﬁc research a considerable number of theorieshave been developed, including some that are extremely incomplete.
Without attempting any exhaustive enumeration, we may try to di-
vide theories of dreams into the following three rough groups, accordingto their underlying assumptions as to the amount and nature of psychicalactivity in dreams.
(1) There are the theories, such as that of Delboeuf [1885, 221 f.], ac-
cording to which the whole of psychical activity continues in dreams. Themind, they assume, does not sleep and its apparatus remains intact; but,since it falls under the conditions of the state of sleep, which differ fromthose of waking life, its normal functioning necessarily produces differentresults during sleep. The question arises in regard to these theories whetherthey are capable of deriving all the distinctions between dreams and wakingthought from the conditions of the state of sleep. Moreover, there is no pos-sibility of their being able to suggest any function for dreaming; they offer
no reason why we should dream, why the complicated mechanism of themental apparatus should continue to operate even when set in circum-stances for which it appears undesigned. Either dreamless sleep or, if dis-turbing stimuli intervene, awakening, would seem to be the only expedientreactions—rather than the third alternative of dreaming.
(2) There are the theories which, on the contrary, presuppose that
dreams imply a lowering of psychical activity, a loosening of connections,and an impoverishment of the material accessible. These theories mustimply the attribution to sleep of characteristics quite different from thosesuggested, for instance, by Delboeuf. Sleep, according to such theories,has a far-reaching inﬂuence upon the mind; it does not consist merely in102 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 102the mind being shut off from the external world; it forces its way, rather,
into the mental mechanism and throws it temporarily out of use. If I mayventure on a simile from the sphere of psychiatry, the ﬁrst group oftheories construct dreams on the model of paranoia, while the secondgroup make them resemble mental deﬁciency or confusional states.
The theory according to which only a fragment of mental activity
ﬁnds expression in dreams, since it has been paralysed by sleep, is by farthe most popular with medical writers and in the scientiﬁc world gener-ally. In so far as any general interest may be supposed to exist in the ex-planation of dreams, this may be described as the ruling theory. It is to beremarked how easily this theory avoids the worst stumbling-block in theway of any explanation of dreams—the difﬁculty of dealing with the con-tradictions involved in them. It regards dreams as a result of a partialawakening—‘a gradual, partial and at the same time highly abnormalawakening,’ to quote a remark of Herbart’s upon dreams (1892, 307).Thus, this theory can make use of a series of conditions of ever-increasingwakefulness, culminating in the completely waking state, in order to ac-count for the series of variations in efﬁciency of mental functioning indreams, ranging from the inefﬁciency revealed by their occasional absurd-ity up to fully concentrated intellectual functioning. [See p. 203.]
Those who ﬁnd that they cannot dispense with a statement in terms
of physiology, or to whom a statement in such terms seems more scien-tiﬁc, will ﬁnd what they want in the account given by Binz (1878, 43):‘This condition’ (of torpor) ‘comes to an end in the early hours of themorning, but only by degrees. The products of fatigue which have accu-mulated in the albumen of the brain gradually diminish; more and moreof them are decomposed or eliminated by the unceasing ﬂow of theblood-stream. Here and there separate groups of cells begin to emergeinto wakefulness, while the torpid state still persists all around them. Theisolated work of these separate groups now appears before our cloudedconsciousness, unchecked by other portions of the brain which governthe process of association. For that reason the images produced, whichcorrespond for the most part to material impressions of the more recentpast, are strung together in a wild and irregular manner. The number ofthe liberated brain cells constantly grows and the senselessness of thedreams correspondingly diminishes.’
This view of dreaming as an incomplete, partial waking state is no
doubt to be found in the writings of every modern physiologist and phi los -opher. The most elaborate exposition of it is given by Maury (1878, 6 f.).103 G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 103It often appears as though that author imagined that the waking or sleep-
ing state could be shifted from one anatomical region to another, eachpar ticular anatomical region being linked to one particular psychicalfunction. I will merely remark at this point that, even if the theory of par-tial waking were conﬁrmed, its details would still remain very much opento  discussion.
This view naturally leaves no room for assigning any function to
dreaming. The logical conclusion that follows from it as to the positionand signiﬁcance of dreams is correctly stated by Binz (1878, 35): ‘Everyobserved fact forces us to conclude that dreams must be characterized assomatic processes, which are in every case useless and in many cases posi-
tively pathological. . . .’
The application to dreams of the term ‘somatic,’ which is italicized by
Binz himself, has more than one bearing. It alludes, in the ﬁrst place, tothe aetiology of dreams which seemed particularly plausible to Binz when
he studied the experimental production of dreams by the use of toxic sub-stances. For theories of this kind involve a tendency to limit the instiga-tion of dreams so far as possible to somatic causes. Put in its most extremeform the view is as follows. Once we have put ourselves to sleep by ex-cluding all stimuli, there is no need and no occasion for dreaming untilthe morning, when the process of being gradually awakened by the im-pact of fresh stimuli might be reﬂected in the phenomenon of dreaming.It is impracticable, however, to keep our sleep free from stimuli; they im-pinge upon the sleeper from all sides—like the germs of life of whichMephistopheles complained
1—from without and from within and even
from parts of his body which are quite unnoticed in waking life. Thussleep is disturbed; ﬁrst one corner of the mind is shaken into wakefulnessand then another; the mind functions for a brief moment with its awak-ened portion and is then glad to fall asleep once more. Dreams are a reac-tion to the disturbance of sleep brought about by a stimulus—a reaction,incidentally, which is quite superﬂuous.
But the description of dreaming—which, after all is said and done, re-
mains a function of the mind—as a somatic process implies anothermeaning as well. It is intended to show that dreams are unworthy to rank104 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [In his ﬁrst conversation with Faust (Part I, [Scene 3]), Mephistopheles com-
plained bitterly that his destructive efforts were perpetually frustrated by the
emergence of thousands of fresh germs of life. The whole passage is quoted byFreud in a footnote to Section VI of Civilization and Its Discontents (1930a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 104as psychical processes. Dreaming has often been compared with ‘the ten
ﬁngers of a man who knows nothing of music wandering over the keys ofa piano’ [Strümpell, 1877, 84; cf. p. 242 below]; and this simile shows aswell as anything the sort of opinion that is usually held of dreaming byrepresentatives of the exact sciences. On this view a dream is somethingwholly and completely incapable of interpretation; for how could the tenﬁngers of an unmusical player produce a piece of music?
Even in the distant past there was no lack of critics of the theory of
partial waking. Thus Burdach (1838, 508 f.) wrote: ‘When it is said thatdreams are a partial waking, in the ﬁrst place this throws no light eitheron waking or on sleeping, and in the second place it says no more thanthat some mental forces are active in dreams while others are at rest. Butvariability of this kind occurs throughout life.’
This ruling theory, which regards dreams as a somatic process, underlies
a most interesting hypothesis put forward for the ﬁrst time by Robert in1886. It is particularly attractive since it is able to suggest a function, a util-itarian purpose, for dreaming. Robert takes as the groundwork of his theorytwo facts of observation which we have already considered in the course ofour examination of the material of dreams (see above, pp. 51 ff.), namelythat we dream so frequently of the most trivial daily impressions and thatwe so rarely carry over into our dreams our important daily interests.Robert (1886, 10) asserts that it is universally true that things which wehave thoroughly thought out never become instigators of dreams but onlythings which are in our minds in an uncompleted shape or which havemerely been touched upon by our thoughts in passing: ‘The reason why itis usually impossible to explain dreams is precisely because they are causedby sensory impressions of the preceding day which failed to attract enoughof the dreamer’s attention.’ [Ibid., 19–20.] Thus the condition which de-termines whether an impression shall ﬁnd its way into a dream is whetherthe process of working over the impression was interrupted or whether theimpression was too unimportant to have a right to be worked over at all.
Robert describes dreams as ‘a somatic process of excretion of which we
become aware in our mental reaction to it.’ [Ibid., 9.] Dreams are excre-tions of thoughts that have been stiﬂed at birth. ‘A man deprived of thecapacity for dreaming would in course of time become mentally de-ranged, because a great mass of uncompleted, unworked-out thoughtsand superﬁcial impressions would accumulate in his brain and would bebound by their bulk to smother the thoughts which should be assimilatedinto his memory as completed wholes.’ [Ibid., 10.] Dreams serve as a105 G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 105safety-valve for the over-burdened brain. They possess the power to heal
and relieve. (Ibid., 32.)
We should be misunderstanding Robert if we were to ask him how it
can come about that the mind is relieved through the presentation ofideas in dreams. What Robert is clearly doing is to infer from these twofeatures of the material of dreams that by some means or other an expul-sion of worthless impressions is accomplished during sleep as a somaticprocess, and that dreaming is not a special sort of psychical process butmerely the information we receive of that expulsion. Moreover, excretionis not the only event which occurs in the mind at night. Robert himselfadds that, besides this, the suggestions arising during the previous day areworked out and that ‘whatever parts of the undigested thoughts are notexcreted are bound together into a rounded whole by threads of thoughtborrowed from the imagination and thus inserted in the memory as aharmless imaginative picture.’ (Ibid., 23.)
But Robert’s theory is diametrically opposed to the ruling one in its es-
timate of the nature of the sources of dreams. According to the latter, there
would be no dreaming at all if the mind were not being constantly wakenedby external and internal sensory stimuli. But in Robert’s view the impulsionto dreaming arises in the mind itself—in the fact of its becoming over-loaded and requiring relief; and he concludes with perfect logic that causesderived from somatic conditions play a subordinate part as determinants ofdreams, and that such causes would be quite incapable of provoking dreamsin a mind in which there was no material for the construction of dreamsderived from waking consciousness. The only qualiﬁcation he makes is toadmit that the phantasy-images arising in dreams out of the depths of themind may be affected by nervous stimuli. (Ibid., 48.) After all, therefore,Robert does not regard dreams as so completely dependent upon somaticevents. Nevertheless, in his view dreams are not psychical processes, theyhave no place among the psychical processes of waking life; they are somaticprocesses occurring every night in the apparatus that is concerned withmental activity, and they have as their function the task of protecting thatapparatus from excessive tension—or, to change the metaphor—of actingas scavengers of the mind.
1106 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Robert’s theory is further discussed on pp. 200 f. and 577.—In the course of a
footnote to Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and Freud, 1895), quoted in the Editor’s
Introduction, p. xiii f., Freud accepted this theory of Robert’s as describing one
of the two main factors in the production of dreams.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 106Another writer, Yves Delage, bases his theory on the same features of
dreams, as revealed in the choice of their material; and it is instructive to
notice the way in which a slight variation in his view of the same thingsleads him to conclusions of a very different bearing.
Delage (1891, 41) tells us that he experienced in his own person, on the
occasion of the death of someone of whom he was fond, the fact that we donotdream of what has occupied all our thoughts during the day, or not un -
til it has begun to give place to other daytime concerns. His investigationsamong other people conﬁrmed him in the general truth of this fact. Hemakes what would be an interesting observation of this kind, if it shouldprove to have general validity, on the dreams of young married couples: ‘S’ilsont été fortement épris, presque jamais ils n’ont rêvé l’un de l’autre avant lemariage ou pendant la lune de miel; et s’ils ont rêvé d’amour c’est pour êtreinﬁdèles avec quelque personne indifférente ou odieuse.’
1[Ibid., 41.] What,
then, do we dream of? Delage identiﬁes the material that occurs in ourdreams as consisting of fragments and residues of the preceding days and ofearlier times. Everything that appears in our dreams, even though we are in-clined at ﬁrst to regard it as a creation of our dream-life, turns out, when wehave examined it more closely, to be unrecognized reproduction [of materialalready experienced]—‘souvenir inconscient.’
2But this ideational material
possesses a common characteristic: it originates from impressions whichprobably affected our senses more strongly than our intelligence or fromwhich our attention was diverted very soon after they emerged. The lessconscious and at the same time the more powerful an impression has been,the more chance it has of playing a part in the next dream.
Here we have what are essentially the same two categories of impres-
sions as are stressed by Robert: the trivial ones and those that have notbeen dealt with. Delage, however, gives the situation a different turn, forhe holds that it is because these impressions have not been dealt with thatthey are capable of producing dreams, not because they are trivial. It is truein a certain sense that trivial impressions, too, have not been dealt withcompletely; being in the nature of fresh impressions, they are ‘autant deressorts tendus’
3which are released during sleep. A powerful impression107 G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function
1 [‘If they were deeply in love, they almost never dreamt of each other before mar-
riage or during their honeymoon; and if they had erotic dreams they were un-
faithful in them with some indifferent or repellent person.’]
2 [‘Unconscious memory.’]
3 [‘They are so many springs under tension.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 107which happens to have met with some check in the process of being
worked over or which has been purposely held under restraint has moreclaim to play a part in dreams than an impression which is weak and al-most unnoticed. The psychical energy which has been stored up duringthe daytime by being inhibited and suppressed becomes the motive forcefor dreams at night. Psychical material that has been suppressed comes tolight in dreams. [Ibid., 1891, 43 .]
1
At this point, unluckily, Delage interrupts his train of thought. He can
attribute only the smallest share in dreams to any independent psychicalactivity; and thus he brings his theory into line with the ruling theory ofthe partial awakening of the brain: ‘En somme le rêve est le produit de lapensée errante, sans but et sans direction, se ﬁxant successivement sur lessouvenirs, qui ont gardé assez d’intensité pour se placer sur sa route etl’arrêter au passage, établissant entre eux un lien tantôt faible et indécis,tantôt plus fort et plus serré, selon que l’activité actuelle du cerveau estplus ou moins abolie par le sommeil.’ [Ibid., 46.]
2
(3) We may place in a third group those theories which ascribe to the
dreaming mind a capacity and inclination for carrying out special psychi-cal activities of which it is largely or totally incapable in waking life. Theputting of these faculties into force usually provides dreaming with a util-itarian function. Most of the estimates formed of dreaming by earlierwriters on psychology fall into this class. It will be enough, however, forme to quote a sentence from Burdach (1838, 512). Dreaming, he writes,‘is a natural activity of the mind which is not limited by the power of in-dividuality, which is not interrupted by self-consciousness and which is108 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1909:] Anatole France expresses exactly the same idea in Le lys
rouge: ‘Ce que nous voyons la nuit, ce sont les restes malheureux de ce que nous
avons négligé dans la veille. Le rêve est souvent la revanche des choses qu’on
méprise ou le reproche des êtres abandonnés.’ [‘What we see during the nightare the miserable remnants of what we have neglected during the previous day.A dream is often a retaliation on the part of what we despise or a reproach onthe part of those we have deserted.’]
2 [‘In short, dreams are the product of thought wandering without purpose or di-
rection, attaching itself in turn to memories which have retained enough inten-sity to stand in its way and interrupt its course, and linking them together by abond which is sometimes weak and vague and sometimes stronger and closer,according as the brain’s activity at the moment is abolished by sleep to a greateror less extent.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 108not directed by self-determination, but which is the freely operating vi-
tality of the sensory centres.’
This revelling of the mind in the free use of its own forces is evidently
regarded by Burdach and the rest as a condition in which the mind is re-freshed and collects new strength for the day’s work—in which, in fact,it enjoys a sort of holiday. Thus Burdach [ibid., 514] quotes with ap-proval the charming words in which the poet Novalis praises the reign ofdreams: ‘Dreams are a shield against the humdrum monotony of life;they set imagination free from its chains so that it may throw into confu-sion all the pictures of everyday existence and break into the unceasinggravity of grown men with the joyful play of a child. Without dreams weshould surely grow sooner old; so we may look on them—not, perhaps asa gift from on high—but as a precious recreation, as friendly companionson our pilgrimage to the grave.’ [Heinrich von Ofterdingen (1802), Part I,
Chap. 1.]
The reviving and healing function of dreams is described with still
more insistence by Purkinje (1846, 456): ‘These functions are performedespecially by productive dreams. They are the easy play of the imaginationand have no connection with the affairs of daytime. The mind has no wishto prolong the tensions of waking life; it seeks to relax them and to recoverfrom them. It produces above all conditions contrary to the waking ones.It cures sorrow by joy, cares by hopes and pictures of happy distraction, ha-tred by love and friendliness, fear by courage and foresight; it allays doubtby conviction and ﬁrm faith, and vain expectation by fulﬁlment. Many ofthe spirit’s wounds which are being constantly re-opened during the dayare healed by sleep, which covers them and shields them from fresh injury.The healing action of time is based partly on this.’ We all have a feelingthat sleep has a beneﬁcial effect upon mental activities, and the obscureworking of the popular mind refuses to let itself be robbed of its belief thatdreaming is one of the ways in which sleep dispenses its beneﬁts.
The most original and far-reaching attempt to explain dreaming as a
special activity of the mind, capable of free expansion only during the stateof sleep, was that undertaken by Scherner in 1861. His book is written ina turgid and high-ﬂown style and is inspired by an almost intoxicated en-thusiasm for his subject which is bound to repel anyone who cannot sharein his fervour. It puts such difﬁculties in the way of an analysis of its con-tents that we turn with relief to the clearer and briefer exposition of Scherner’s doctrines given by the philosopher Volkelt. ‘Suggestive gleams109 G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 109of meaning proceed like lightning-ﬂashes out of these mystical agglomer-
ations, these clouds of glory and splendour—but they do not illuminate aphilosopher’s path.’ It is in these terms that Scherner’s writings are judgedeven by his disciple. [Volkelt, 1875, 29.]
Scherner is not one of those who believe that the capacities of the mind
continue undiminished in dream-life. He himself [in Volkelt’s words(ibid., 30)] shows how the centralized core of the ego—its spontaneousenergy—is deprived of its nervous force in dreams, how as a result of thisdecentralization the processes of cognition, feeling, willing and ideationare modiﬁed, and how the remnants of these psychical functions no longerpossess a truly mental character but become nothing more than mecha-nisms. But by way of contrast, the mental activity which may be describedas ‘imagination,’ liberated from the domination of reason and from anymoderating control, leaps into a position of unlimited sovereignty.Though dream-imagination makes use of recent waking memories for itsbuilding material, it erects them into structures bearing not the remotestresemblance to those of waking life; it reveals itself in dreams as possessingnot merely reproductive but productive powers. [Ibid., 31.] Its characteris-
tics are what lend their peculiar features to dreams. It shows a preferencefor what is immoderate, exaggerated and monstrous. But at the same time,being freed from the hindrances of the categories of thought, it gains inpliancy, agility and versatility. It is susceptible in the subtlest manner to theshades of the tender feelings and to passionate emotions, and promptly in-corporates our inner life into external plastic pictures. Imagination indreams is without the power of conceptual speech. It is obliged to paintwhat it has to say pictorially, and, since there are no concepts to exercisean attenuating inﬂuence, it makes full and powerful use of the pictorialform. Thus, however clear its speech may be, it is diffuse, clumsy and awk-ward. The clarity of its speech suffers particularly from the fact that it hasa dislike of representing an object by its proper image, and prefers someextraneous image which will express only that particular one of the object’sattributes which it is seeking to represent. Here we have the ‘symbolizingactivity’ of the imagination. . . . [Ibid., 32.] Another very important pointis that dream-imagination never depicts things completely, but only inoutline and even so only in the roughest fashion. For this reason its paint-ings seem like inspired sketches. It does not halt, however, at the mere rep-resentation of an object; it is under an internal necessity to involve thedream-ego to a greater or less extent with the object and thus produce anevent. For instance, a dream caused by a visual stimulus may represent gold110 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 110coins in the street; the dreamer will pick them up delightedly and carry
them off. [Ibid., 33.]
The material with which dream-imagination accomplishes its artistic
work is principally, according to Scherner, provided by the organic somaticstimuli which are so obscure during the daytime. (See above, pp. 65 ff.)Thus the excessively fantastic hypothesis put forward by Scherner and theperhaps unduly sober doctrines of Wundt and other physiologists, whichare poles asunder in other respects, are entirely at one in regard to theirtheory of the sources and instigators of dreams. According to the physio-logical view, however, the mental reaction to the internal somatic stimuliis exhausted with the provoking of certain ideas appropriate to the stimuli;these ideas give rise to others along associative lines and at this point thecourse of psychical events in dreams seems to be at an end. According toScherner, on the other hand, the somatic stimuli do no more than providethe mind with material of which it can make use for its imaginative pur-poses. The formation of dreams only begins, in  Scherner’s eyes, at thepoint which the other writers regard as its end.
What dream-imagination does to the somatic stimuli cannot, of course,
be regarded as serving any useful purpose. It plays about with them, andpictures the organic sources, from which the stimuli of the dream in ques-tion have arisen, in some kind of plastic symbolism.  Scherner is of theopinion—though here Volkelt [1875, 37] and others refuse to followhim—that dream-imagination has one particular favourite way of repre-senting the organism as a whole: namely as a house. Fortunately, however,it does not seem to be restricted to this one method of representation. Onthe other hand, it may make use of a whole row of houses to indicate a sin-gle organ; for instance, a very long street of houses may represent a stimu-lus from the intestines. Again, separate portions of a house may stand forseparate portions of the body; thus, in a dream caused by a headache, thehead may be represented by the ceiling of a room covered with disgusting,toad-like spiders. [Ibid., 33 f.]
Leaving this house-symbolism on one side, any number of other kinds
of things may be used to represent the parts of the body from which thestimulus to the dream has arisen. ‘Thus the breathing lung will be sym-bolically represented by a blazing furnace, with ﬂames roaring with asound like the passage of air; the heart will be represented by hollowboxes or baskets, the bladder by round, bag-shaped objects or, more gen-erally, by hollow ones. A dream caused by stimuli arising from the malesexual organs may cause the dreamer to ﬁnd the top part of a clarinet in111 G. Theories of Dreaming and Its Function9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 111the street or the mouth-piece of a tobacco-pipe, or again, a piece of fur.
Here the clarinet and the tobacco-pipe represent the approximate shapeof the male organ, while the fur stands for the pubic hair. In the case of asexual dream in a woman, the narrow space where the thighs come to-gether may be represented by a narrow courtyard surrounded by houses,while the vagina may be symbolized by a soft, slippery and very narrowfoot-path leading across the yard, along which the dreamer has to pass, inorder, perhaps, to take a gentleman a letter.’ (Ibid., 34.) It is of special im-portance that, at the end of dreams with a somatic stimulus, such asthese, the dream-imagination often throws aside its veil, as it were, byopenly revealing the organ concerned or its function. Thus a dream ‘witha dental stimulus’ usually ends by the dreamer picturing himself pullinga tooth out of his mouth. [Ibid., 35.]
Dream-imagination may, however, not merely direct its attention to the
form of the stimulating organ; it may equally well symbolize the substance
contained in that organ. In this way, a dream with an intestinal stimulusmay lead the dreamer along muddy streets, or one with a urinary stimulusmay lead him to a foaming stream. Or the stimulus as such, the nature ofthe excitement it produces, or the object it desires, may be symbolicallyrepresented. Or the dream-ego may enter into concrete relations with thesymbols of its own state; for instance, in the case of painful stimuli thedreamer may engage in a desperate struggle with ﬁerce dogs or savagebulls, or a woman in a sexual dream may ﬁnd herself pursued by a nakedman. [Ibid., 35 f.] Quite apart from the wealth of the means that it em-ploys, the symbolizing activity of the imagination remains the central forcein every dream. [Ibid., 36.] The task of penetrating more deeply into thenature of this imagination and of ﬁnding a place for it in a system of philo-sophical thought is attempted by Volkelt in the pages of his book. But,though it is well and feelingly written, it remains excessively hard to un-derstand for anyone whose early education has not prepared him for asympathetic grasp of the conceptual constructions of philosophy.
There is no utilitarian function attached to Scherner’s symbolizing
imagination. The mind plays in its sleep with the stimuli that impingeupon it. One might almost suspect that it plays with them mischievously.But I might also be asked whether my detailed examination of Scherner’stheory of dreams can serve any utilitarian purpose, since its arbitrarycharacter and its disobedience to all the rules of research seem only tooobvious. By way of rejoinder, I might register a protest against the arro-gance which would dismiss Scherner’s theory unexamined. His theory is112 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 112built upon the impression made by his dreams upon a man who consid-
ered them with the greatest attention and seems to have had a great per-sonal gift for investigating the obscure things of the mind. Moreover itdeals with a subject that for thousands of years has been regarded bymankind as enigmatic, no doubt, but also as important in itself and itsimplications—a subject to the elucidation of which exact science, on itsown admission, has contributed little apart from an attempt (in direct op-position to popular feeling) to deny it any meaning or signiﬁcance. Andﬁnally it may honestly be said that in attempting to explain dreams it isnot easy to avoid being fantastic. Ganglion cells can be fantastic too. Thepassage which I quoted on p. 104 from a sober and exact investigator likeBinz, and which describes the way in which the dawn of awakening stealsover the mass of sleeping cells in the cerebral cortex, is no less fantastic—and no less improbable—than Scherner’s attempts at interpretation. Ihope to be able to show that behind the latter there is an element of real-ity, though it has only been vaguely perceived and lacks the attribute ofuniversality which should characterize a theory of dreams. Meanwhile thecontrast between Scherner’s theory and the medical one will show us theextremes between which explanations of dream-life doubtfully oscillate tothis very day.
1
(H)
THE RELATIONS BETWEEN 
DREAMS AND MENTAL DISEASES
When we speak of the relation of dreams to mental disorders we may
have three things in mind: (1) aetiological and clinical connections, aswhen a dream represents a psychotic state, or introduces it, or is left overfrom it; (2) modiﬁcations to which dream-life is subject in cases of mentaldisease; and (3) intrinsic connections between dreams and psychoses,analogies pointing to their being essentially akin. These numerous rela-tions between the two groups of phenomena were a favourite topic amongmedical writers in earlier times and have become so once again today, as is113 H. Dreams and Mental Diseases
1 [Scherner’s theories are further discussed on pp. 245 ff. and 360.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 113shown by the bibliographies of the subject collected by Spitta [1882, 196
f. and 319 f.], Radestock [1879, 217], Maury [1878, 124 f.] and Tissié[1898, 77 f.]. Quite recently Sante de Sanctis has turned his attention tothis subject.
1It will be enough for the purpose of my thesis if I do no more
than touch upon this important question.
As regards the clinical and aetiological connections between dreams
and psychoses, the following observations may be given as samples. Hohn-baum [1830, 124], quoted by Krauss [1858, 619], reports that a ﬁrst out-break of delusional insanity often originates in an anxious or terrifyingdream, and that the dominant idea is connected with the dream. Sante deSanctis brings forward similar observations in cases of paranoia and de-clares that in some of these the dream was the ‘vraie cause déterminantede la folie.’
2The psychosis, says de Sanctis, may come to life at a single
blow with the appearance of the operative dream which brings the delu-sional material to light; or it may develop slowly in a series of furtherdreams, which have still to overcome a certain amount of doubt. In one ofhis cases the signiﬁcant dream was followed by mild hysterical attacks andlater by a condition of anxious melancholia. Féré [1886] (quoted by Tissié,1898 [78]) reports a dream which resulted in a hysterical paralysis. In theseinstances the dreams are represented as the aetiology of the mental disor-der; but we should be doing equal justice to the facts if we said that themental disorder made its ﬁrst appearance in dream-life, that it ﬁrst brokethrough in a dream. In some further examples the pathological symptomsare contained in dream-life, or the psychosis is limited to dream-life. ThusThomayer (1897) draws attention to certain anxiety-dreams which hethinks should be regarded as equivalents of epileptic ﬁts. Allison [1868](quoted by Radestock, 1879 [225]) has described a ‘nocturnal insanity,’ inwhich the patient appears completely healthy during the day but is regu-larly subject at night to hallucinations, ﬁts of frenzy, etc. Similar observa-tions are reported by de Sanctis [1899, 226] (a dream in an alcoholicpatient which was equivalent to a paranoia, and which represented voicesaccusing his wife of unfaithfulness) and Tissié. The latter (1898, [147 ff.])gives copious recent examples in which acts of a pathological nature, such114 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Among later writers who deal with these relations are
Féré [1887], Ideler [1862], Lasègue [1881], Pichon [1896], Régis [1894], Vespa
[1897], Giessler [1888, etc.], Kazowsky [1901], Pachantoni [1909], etc.
2 [‘The true determining cause of insanity.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 114as conduct based on delusional premises and obsessive impulses, were de-
rived from dreams. Guislain [1833] describes a case in which sleep was re-placed by an intermittent insanity.
There can be no doubt that alongside of the psychology of dreams
physicians will some day have to turn their attention to a psychopathology
of dreams.
In cases of recovery from mental diseases it can often be quite clearly
observed that, while functioning is normal during the day, dream-life isstill under the inﬂuence of the psychosis. According to Krauss (1859,270), Gregory ﬁrst drew attention to this fact. Macario [1847], quotedby Tissié [1898, 89], describes how a manic patient, a week after his com-plete recovery, was still subject in his dreams to the ﬂight of ideas and theviolent passions which were characteristic of his illness.
Very little research has hitherto been carried out into the modiﬁcations
occurring in dream-life during chronic psychoses.
1On the other hand, at-
tention was long ago directed to the underlying kinship between dreamsand mental disorders, exhibited in the wide measure of agreement betweentheir manifestations. Maury (1854, 124) tells us that Cabanis (1802) wasthe ﬁrst to remark on them, and after him Lélut [1852], J. Moreau (1855)and, in particular, Maine de Biran [1834, 111 ff.] the philosopher. Nodoubt the comparison goes back still earlier. Radestock (1879, 217) intro-duces the chapter in which he deals with it by a number of quotationsdrawing an analogy between dreams and madness. Kant writes somewhere[1764]: ‘The madman is a waking dreamer.’ Krauss (1859, 270) declaresthat ‘insanity is a dream dreamt while the senses are awake.’ Schopenhauer[1862, 1, 246] calls dreams a brief madness and madness a long dream. Ha-
gen [1846, 812] describes delirium as dream-life induced not by sleep butby illness. Wundt [1878, 662] writes: ‘We ourselves, in fact, can experiencein dreams almost all the phenomena to be met with in insane asylums.’
Spitta (1882, 199), in much the same way as Maury (1854), enumer-
ates as follows the different points of agreement which constitute the basisfor this comparison: ‘(1) Self-consciousness is suspended or at least re-tarded, which results in a lack of insight into the nature of the condition,with consequent inability to feel surprise and loss of moral consciousness.(2) Perception by the sense organs is modiﬁed: being diminished in115 H. Dreams and Mental Diseases
1 [This question was later examined by Freud himself (1922b, end of Section B).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 115dreams but as a rule greatly increased in insanity. (3) Inter-connection of
ideas occurs exclusively according to the laws of association and reproduc-tion; ideas thus fall into sequences automatically and there is a conse-quent lack of proportion in the relation between ideas (exaggerations andillusions). All this leads to (4) an alteration or in some cases a reversal ofpersonality and occasionally of character traits (perverse conduct).’
Radestock (1879, 219) adds a few more features—analogies between
the material in the two cases: ‘The majority of hallucinations and illusions
occur in the region of the senses of sight and hearing and of coenaesthe-sia. As in the case of dreams, the senses of smell and taste provide thefewest elements.—Both in patients suffering from fever and in dreamersmemories arise from the remote past; both sleeping and sick men recol-lect things which waking and healthy men seem to have forgotten.’ Theanalogy between dreams and psychoses is only fully appreciated when itis seen to extend to the details of expressive movement and to particularcharacteristics of facial expression.
‘A man tormented by physical and mental suffering obtains from
dreams what reality denies him: health and happiness. So too in mentaldisease there are bright pictures of happiness, grandeur, eminence andwealth. The supposed possession of property and the imaginary fulﬁl-ment of wishes—the withholding or destruction of which actually affordsa psychological basis for insanity—often constitute the chief content ofa delirium. A woman who has lost a loved child experiences the joys ofmotherhood in her delirium; a man who has lost his money believes him-self immensely rich; a girl who has been deceived feels that she is tenderlyloved.’
(This passage from Radestock is actually a summary of an acute obser-
vation made by Griesinger (1861, 106), who shows quite clearly thatideas in dreams and in psychoses have in common the characteristic ofbeing fulﬁlments of wishes . My own researches have taught me that in this
fact lies the key to a psychological theory of both dreams and psychoses.)
‘The chief feature of dreams and of insanity lies in their eccentric trains
of thought and their weakness of judgement.’ In both states [Radestockcontinues] we ﬁnd an over-valuation of the subject’s own mental achieve-ments which seems senseless to a sober view; the rapid sequence of ideasin dreams is paralleled by the ﬂight of ideas in psychoses. In both there isa complete lack of sense of time. In dreams the personality may be split—when, for instance, the dreamer’s own knowledge is divided between twopersons and when, in the dream, the extraneous ego corrects the actual116 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 116one. This is precisely on a par with the splitting of the personality that is
familiar to us in hallucinatory paranoia; the dreamer too hears his ownthoughts pronounced by extraneous voices. Even chronic delusional ideashave their analogy in stereotyped recurrent pathological dreams (le rêve obsédant).—It not infrequently happens that after recovering from a delir-ium patients will say that the whole period of their illness seems to themlike a not unpleasant dream: indeed they will sometimes tell us that evenduring the illness they have occasionally had a feeling that they are onlycaught up in a dream—as is often the case in dreams occurring in sleep.
After all this, it is not surprising that Radestock sums up his views, and
those of many others, by declaring that ‘insanity, an abnormal patholog-ical phenomenon, is to be regarded as an intensiﬁcation of the periodi-cally recurrent normal condition of dreaming.’ (Ibid., 228.)
Krauss (1859, 270 f.) has sought to establish what is perhaps a still more
intimate connection between dreams and insanity than can be demon-strated by an analogy between these external manifestations. This connec-tion he sees in their aetiology or rather in the sources of their excitation.The fundamental element common to the two states lies according to him,as we have seen [pp. 70 f.], in organically determined sensations, in sensa-tions derived from somatic stimuli, in the coenaesthesia which is basedupon contributions arising from all the organs. (Cf. Peisse, 1857, 2, 21,
quoted by Maury, 1878, 52.)
The indisputable analogy between dreams and insanity, extending as
it does down to their characteristic details, is one of the most powerfulprops of the medical theory of dream-life, which regards dreaming as auseless and disturbing process and as the expression of a reduced activityof the mind. Nevertheless it is not to be expected that we shall ﬁnd theultimate explanation of dreams in the direction of mental disorders; forthe unsatisfactory state of our knowledge of the origin of these latter con-ditions is generally recognized. It is quite likely, on the contrary, that amodiﬁcation of our attitude towards dreams will at the same time affectour views upon the internal mechanism of mental disorders and that weshall be working towards an explanation of the psychoses while we are en-deavouring to throw some light on the mystery of dreams.
1117 H. Dreams and Mental Diseases
1 [A discussion of the relation between dreams and psychoses will be found in Lec-
ture 29 of the New Introductory Lectures (Freud, 1933a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 117POSTSCRIPT, 1909
The fact that I have not extended my account of the literature dealing
with the problems of dreams to cover the period between the ﬁrst and sec-
ond editions of this book stands in need of a justiﬁcation. It may strike thereader as an unsatisfactory one, but for me it was none the less decisive.The motives which led me to give any account at all of the way in whichearlier writers have dealt with dreams were exhausted with the completionof this introductory chapter; to continue the task would have cost me anextraordinary effort—and the result would have been of very little use orinstruction. For the intervening nine years have produced nothing new orvaluable either in factual material or in opinions that might throw light onthe subject. In the majority of publications that have appeared during theinterval my work has remained unmentioned and unconsidered. It has, ofcourse, received least attention from those who are engaged in what is de-scribed as ‘research’ into dreams, and who have thus provided a shining ex-ample of the repugnance to learning anything new which is characteristicof men of science. In the ironical words of Anatole France, ‘ les savants ne
sont pas curieux .’ If there were such a thing in science as a right to retaliate,
I should certainly be justiﬁed in my turn in disregarding the literature thathas been issued since the publication of this book. The few notices of itthat have appeared in scientiﬁc periodicals show so much lackof under-
standing and so much misunderstanding that my only reply to the criticswould be to suggest their reading the book again—or perhaps, indeed,merely to suggest their reading it.
A large number of dreams have been published and analysed in accor-
dance with my directions in papers by physicians who have decided toadopt the psycho-analytic therapeutic procedure, as well as by other au-thors.
1In so far as these writings have gone beyond a mere conﬁrmation
of my views I have included their ﬁndings in the course of my exposition.I have added a second bibliography at the end of the volume containing118 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [In the 1909 and 1911 editions only, there was a parenthesis at this point con-
taining the names of Jung, Abraham, Riklin, Muthmann and Stekel. In 1909
only, the next sentence read: ‘But these publications have merely conﬁrmed myviews and not added anything to them.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 118a list of the most important works that have appeared since this book was
ﬁrst published.1The extensive monograph on dreams by Sante de Sanctis
(1899), of which a German translation appeared soon after its issue, waspublished almost simultaneously with my Interpretation of Dreams , so
that neither I nor the Italian author was able to comment upon eachother’s work. I have unfortunately been unable to escape the conclusionthat his painstaking volume is totally deﬁcient in ideas—so much so, infact, that it would not even lead one to suspect the existence of the prob-lems with which I have dealt.
Only two publications require to be mentioned which come near to
my own treatment of the problems of dreams. Hermann Swoboda(1904), a youthful philosopher, has undertaken the task of extending topsychical events the discovery of a biological periodicity (in 23-day and28-day periods) made by Wilhelm Fliess [1906].
2In the course of his
highly imaginative work he has endeavoured to use this key for the solu-tion, among other problems, of the riddle of dreams. His ﬁndings wouldseem to underestimate the signiﬁcance of dreams; the subject-matter of adream, on his view, is to be explained as an assemblage of all the memo-ries which, on the night on which it is dreamt, complete one of the bio-logical periods, whether for the ﬁrst or for the nth time. A personal
communication from the author led me at ﬁrst to suppose that he himselfno longer took this theory seriously, but it seems that this was a mistakenconclusion on my part.
3At a later stage [see below, pp. 190 ff.] I shall re-
port upon some observations which I made in connection with Swo-boda’s suggestion but which led me to no convincing conclusion. I wasthe more pleased when, in an unexpected quarter, I made the chance dis-covery of a view of dreams which coincides entirely with the core of myown theory. It is impossible, for chronological reasons, that the statementin question can have been inﬂuenced by my book. I must therefore hailit as the single discoverable instance in the literature of the subject of an119 Postscript, 1909
1 [See the Editor’s Introduction, pp. xii f. and xx.]
2 [An account of Fliess’s theories and of his relations with Swoboda is given in Sec-
tion IV of Kris’s introduction to Freud’s correspondence with Fliess (Freud,
1950a).]
3 [In its present form this sentence dates from 1911. In 1909 it read: ‘A personal
communication from the author to the effect that he himself no longer supportsthese views exempts me from giving them serious consideration.’ The followingsentence was added in 1911.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 119independent thinker who is in agreement with the essence of my theory
of dreams. The book which contains the passage upon dreaming which Ihave in mind appeared in its second edition in 1900 under the title ofPhantasien eines Realisten by ‘Lynkeus.’ [First edition, 1899.]
1
POSTSCRIPT, 1914
The preceding plea of justiﬁcation was written in 1909. I am bound
to admit that since then the situation has changed; my contribution tothe interpretation of dreams is no longer neglected by writers on the sub-ject. The new state of affairs, however, has now made it quite out of thequestion for me to extend my previous account of the literature. The In-
terpretation of Dreams has raised a whole series of fresh considerations and
problems which have been discussed in a great variety of ways. I cannotgive an account of these works, however, before I have expounded thoseviews of my own on which they are based. I have therefore dealt withwhatever seems to me of value in the latest literature at its appropriateplace in the course of the discussion which now follows.120 I. The Scientific Literature on Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1930:] Cf: my paper on Josef Popper-Lynkeus and the theory of
dreams (1923 f.). [Freud wrote a further paper on the subject (1932c ). The pas-
sage referred to in the text above will be found quoted in full below in a footnote
on p. 325 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 120CHAPTER II
THE METHOD OF INTERPRETING DREAMS:
AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN DREAM
The title that I have chosen for my work makes plain which of the tradi-
tional approaches to the problem of dreams I am inclined to follow. The
aim which I have set before myself is to show that dreams are capable ofbeing interpreted; and any contributions I may be able to make towardsthe solution of the problems dealt with in the last chapter will only ariseas by-products in the course of carrying out my proper task. My pre-sumption that dreams can be interpreted at once puts me in oppositionto the ruling theory of dreams and in fact to every theory of dreams withthe single exception of Scherner’s [pp. 109 ff.]; for ‘interpreting’ a dreamimplies assigning a ‘meaning’ to it—that is, replacing it by somethingwhich ﬁts into the chain of our mental acts as a link having a validity andimportance equal to the rest. As we have seen, the scientiﬁc theories ofdreams leave no room for any problem of interpreting them, since in theirview a dream is not a mental act at all, but a somatic process signalizingits occurrence by indications registered in the mental apparatus. Layopinion has taken a different attitude throughout the ages. It has exer-cised its indefeasible right to behave inconsistently; and, though admit-ting that dreams are unintelligible and absurd, it cannot bring itself todeclare that they have no signiﬁcance at all. Led by some obscure feeling,it seems to assume that, in spite of everything, every dream has a mean-ing, though a hidden one, that dreams are designed to take the place ofsome other process of thought, and that we have only to undo the substi-tution correctly in order to arrive at this hidden meaning.
1219780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 121Thus the lay world has from the earliest times concerned itself with
‘interpreting’ dreams and in its attempts to do so it has made use of two
essentially different methods.
The ﬁrst of these procedures considers the content of the dream as a
whole and seeks to replace it by another content which is intelligible andin certain respects analogous to the original one. This is ‘ symbolic ’ dream-
interpreting; and it inevitably breaks down when faced by dreams whichare not merely unintelligible but also confused. An example of this pro-cedure is to be seen in the explanation of Pharaoh’s dream propoundedby Joseph in the Bible. The seven fat kine followed by seven lean kinethat ate up the fat kine—all this was a symbolic substitute for a prophecyof seven years of famine in the land of Egypt which should consume allthat was brought forth in the seven years of plenty. Most of the artiﬁcialdreams constructed by imaginative writers are designed for a symbolic in-terpretation of this sort: they reproduce the writer’s thoughts under a dis-guise which is regarded as harmonizing with the recognized characteristicsof dreams.
1The idea of dreams being chieﬂy concerned with the future
and being able to foretell it—a remnant of the old prophetic signiﬁcanceof dreams—provides a reason for transposing the meaning of the dream,when it has been arrived at by symbolic interpretation, into the futuretense. It is of course impossible to give instructions upon the method of
arriving at a symbolic interpretation. Success must be a question of hit-ting on a clever idea, of direct intuition, and for that reason it was possi-ble for dream-interpretation by means of symbolism to be exalted into anartistic activity dependent on the possession of peculiar gifts.
2122 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1909:] I found by chance in Gradiva, a story written by Wil-
helm Jensen, a number of artiﬁcial dreams which were perfectly correctly con-
structed and could be interpreted just as though they had not been invented buthad been dreamt by real people. In reply to an enquiry, the author conﬁrmed thefact that he had no knowledge of my theory of dreams. I have argued that theagreement between my researches and this writer’s creations is evidence in favourof the correctness of my analysis of dreams. (See Freud, 1907a.)
2 [Footnote added 1914:] Aristotle [De divinatione per somnum, II ( Trans. , 1935,
383)] remarked in this connection that the best interpreter of dreams was theman who could best grasp similarities; for dream-pictures, like pictures on water,are pulled out of shape by movement, and the most successful interpreter is theman who can detect the truth from the misshapen picture. (Büchsenschütz,1868, 65.)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 122The second of the two popular methods of interpreting dreams is far
from making any such claims. It might be described as the ‘decoding’
method, since it treats dreams as a kind of cryptography in which eachsign can be translated into another sign having a known meaning, in ac-cordance with a ﬁxed key. Suppose, for instance, that I have dreamt of aletter and also of a funeral. If I consult a ‘dream-book,’ I ﬁnd that ‘letter’must be translated by ‘trouble’ and ‘funeral’ by ‘betrothal.’ It then re-mains for me to link together the keywords which I have deciphered inthis way and, once more, to transpose the result into the future tense. Aninteresting modiﬁcation of the process of decoding, which to some extentcorrects the purely mechanical character of its method of transposing, isto be found in the book written upon the interpretation of dreams[Oneirocritica ] by Artemidorus of Daldis.
1This method takes into ac-
count not only the content of the dream but also the character and cir-cumstances of the dreamer; so that the same dream-element will have a123 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Artemidorus of Daldis, who was probably born at the be-
ginning of the second century A.D., has left us the most complete and painstak-
ing study of dream-interpretation as practised in the Graeco-Roman world. As
Theodor Gomperz (1866, 7 f.) points out, he insisted on the importance of bas-ing the interpretation of dreams on observation and experience, and made arigid distinction between his own art and others that were illusory. The principleof his interpretative art, according to Gomperz, is identical with magic, the prin-ciple of association. A thing in a dream means what it recalls to the mind—tothe dream-interpreter’s mind, it need hardly be said. An insuperable source ofarbitrariness and uncertainty arises from the fact that the dream-element may re-call various things to the interpreter’s mind and may recall something different
to different interpreters. The technique which I describe in the pages that followdiffers in one essential respect from the ancient method: it imposes the task ofinterpretation upon the dreamer himself. It is not concerned with what occursto the interpreter in connection with a particular element of the dream, but with
what occurs to the dreamer.—Recent reports, however, from a missionary, FatherTﬁnkdji (1913, [516–17 and 523]), show that modern dream-interpreters in theEast also make free use of the dreamer’s collaboration. He writes as follows ofdream-interpreters among the Arabs of Mesopotamia: ‘Pour interprêter exacte-ment un songe, les oniromanciens les plus habiles s’informent de ceux qui lesconsultent de toutes les circonstances qu’ils regardent nécessaires pour la bonneexplication. . . . En un mot, nos oniromanciens ne laissent aucune circonstanceleur échapper et ne donnent l’interprétation désirée avant d’avoir parfaitementsaisi et reçu toutes les interrogations désirables.’ [‘In order to give a precise inter-pretation of a dream, the most skilful dream-diviners ﬁnd out from those who9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 123different meaning for a rich man, a married man or, let us say, an orator,
from what it has for a poor man, a bachelor or a merchant. The essenceof the decoding procedure, however, lies in the fact that the work of in-terpretation is not brought to bear on the dream as a whole but on eachportion of the dream’s content independently, as though the dream werea geological conglomerate in which each fragment of rock required a sep-arate assessment. There can be no question that the invention of the de-coding method of interpretation was suggested by disconnected andconfused dreams.
2
It cannot be doubted for a moment that neither of the two popular pro-
cedures for interpreting dreams can be employed for a scientiﬁc treatmentof the subject. The symbolic method is restricted in its application and in-capable of being laid down on general lines. In the case of the decodingmethod everything depends on the trustworthiness of the ‘key’—thedream-book, and of this we have no guarantee. Thus one might feel124 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
consult them all the circumstances which they consider essential in order to ar-
rive at a right explanation. . . . In short, these dream-diviners do not allow a single point to escape them and only give their interpretation after they have com-pletely mastered the replies to all the necessary enquiries.’] Among these enquiriesare habitually included questions as to the dreamer’s closest family relations—his parents, wife and children—as well as such a typical formula as: ‘Habuistinein hac nocte copulam conjugalem ante vel post somnium?’ [‘Did you copulatewith your wife that night before or after you had the dream?’]—‘L’idée domi-nante dans l’interprétation des songes consiste à expliquer le rêve par son op-posée.’ [‘The principal idea in interpreting dreams lies in explaining a dream byits opposite.’]
2 [Footnote added 1909:] Dr. Alfred Robitsek has pointed out to me that the ori-
ental ‘dream-books’ (of which ours are wretched imitations) base the greaternumber of their interpretations of dream-elements upon similarity of soundsand resemblance between words. The fact that these connections inevitably dis-appear in translation accounts for the unintelligibility of the renderings in ourown popular dream-books. The extraordinarily important part played by pun-ning and verbal quibbles in the ancient civilizations of the East may be studiedin the writings of Hugo Winckler [the famous archaeologist].—[ Added 1911:]
The nicest instance of a dream-interpretation which has reached us from ancienttimes is based on a play upon words. It is told by Artemidorus [Book IV, Chap.24, Krauss’s translation, 1881, 255]: ‘I think too that Aristander gave a mosthappy interpretation to Alexander of Macedon when he had surrounded Tyre[
Τ/H11032νρος ] and was besieging it but was feeling uneasy and disturbed because of
the length of time the siege was taking. Alexander dreamt he saw a satyr9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 124tempted to agree with the philosophers and the psychiatrists and, like them,
rule out the problem of dream-interpretation as a purely fanciful task.2
But I have been taught better. I have been driven to realize that here
once more we have one of those not infrequent cases in which an ancientand jealously held popular belief seems to be nearer the truth than thejudgement of the prevalent science of today. I must afﬁrm that dreamsreally have a meaning and that a scientiﬁc procedure for interpretingthem is possible.
My knowledge of the procedure was reached in the following manner.
I have been engaged for many years (with a therapeutic aim in view) inunravelling certain psycho-pathological structures—hysterical phobias,obsessional ideas, and so on. I have been doing so, in fact, ever since Ilearnt from an important communication by Josef Breuer that as regardsthese structures (which are looked on as pathological symptoms) unrav-elling them coincides with removing them.
3(Cf. Breuer and Freud,
1895.) If a pathological idea of this sort can be traced back to the ele-ments in the patient’s mental life from which it originated, it simultane-ously crumbles away and the patient is freed from it. Considering theimpotence of our other therapeutic efforts and the puzzling nature ofthese disorders, I felt tempted to follow the path marked out by Breuer,in spite of every difﬁculty, till a complete explanation was reached. I shallhave on another occasion to report at length upon the form ﬁnally taken125 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
[σ/H11032ατυρος ] dancing on his shield. Aristander happened to be in the neighbor-
hood of Tyre, in attendance on the king during his Syrian campaign. By divid-
ing the word for satyr into σ/H11032αand τ/H11032νρος he encouraged the king to press home
the siege so that he became master of the city.’ ( σ/H11032αΤ/H11032νρος = Tyre is thine.)—
 Indeed, dreams are so closely related to linguistic expression that Ferenczi [1910]has truly remarked that every tongue has its own dream-language. It is impossi-ble as a rule to translate a dream into a foreign language and this is equally true,I fancy, of a book such as the present one. [ Added 1930:] Nevertheless Dr. A. A.
Brill of New York, and others after him, have succeeded in translating The Inter-
pretation of Dreams.
2 After I had completed my manuscript I came across a work by Stumpf (1899)
which agrees with my views in seeking to prove that dreams have a meaning andcan be interpreted. He effects his interpretations, however, by means of a sym-bolism of an allegorical character without any guarantee of the general validityof his procedure.
3 [‘Auﬂösung’ and ‘Lösung’ in the original.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 125by this procedure and the results of my labours. It was in the course of
these psycho-analytic studies that I came upon dream-interpretation. Mypatients were pledged to communicate to me every idea or thought thatoccurred to them in connection with some particular subject; amongstother things they told me their dreams and so taught me that a dream canbe inserted into the psychical chain that has to be traced backwards in thememory from a pathological idea. It was then only a short step to treatingthe dream itself as a symptom and to applying to dreams the method ofinterpretation that had been worked out for symptoms.
This involves some psychological preparation of the patient. We must
aim at bringing about two changes in him: an increase in the attention hepays to his own psychical perceptions and the elimination of the criticismby which he normally sifts the thoughts that occur to him. In order thathe may be able to concentrate his attention on his self-observation it is anadvantage for him to lie in a restful attitude and shut his eyes.
1It is nec-
essary to insist explicitly on his renouncing all criticism of the thoughtsthat he perceives. We therefore tell him that the success of the psycho-analysis depends on his noticing and reporting whatever comes into hishead and not being misled, for instance, into suppressing an idea becauseit strikes him as unimportant or irrelevant or because it seems to himmeaningless. He must adopt a completely impartial attitude to what oc-curs to him, since it is precisely his critical attitude which is responsiblefor his being unable, in the ordinary course of things, to achieve the de-sired unravelling of his dream or obsessional idea or whatever it may be.
I have noticed in my psycho-analytical work that the whole frame of
mind of a man who is reﬂecting is totally different from that of a man whois observing his own psychical processes. In reﬂection there is one more psy-chical activity at work than in the most attentive self- observation, and thisis shown amongst other things by the tense looks and wrinkled forehead ofa person pursuing his reﬂections as compared with the restful expression ofa self-observer. In both cases attention
2must be concentrated, but the man
who is reﬂecting is also exercising his critical faculty; this leads him to reject
some of the ideas that occur to him after perceiving them, to cut short oth-126 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [The stress upon the advisability of shutting the eyes (a remnant of the old hyp-
notic procedure) was very soon dropped. See, for instance, the account of psy-
cho-analytic technique in Freud (1904 a), where it is speciﬁcally mentioned that
the analyst does not ask the patient to shut his eyes.]
2 [The function of attention is discussed below (p. 590).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 126ers without following the trains of thought which they would open up to
him, and to behave in such a way towards still others that they never be-come conscious at all and are accordingly suppressed before being per-ceived. The self-observer on the other hand need only take the trouble tosuppress his critical faculty. If he succeeds in doing that, innumerable ideascome into his consciousness of which he could otherwise never havegot hold. The material which is in this way freshly obtained for his self- perception makes it possible to interpret both his pathological ideas and hisdream-structures. What is in question, evidently, is the establishment of apsychical state which, in its distribution of psychical energy (that is, of mo-bile attention), bears some analogy to the state before falling asleep—andno doubt also to hypnosis. As we fall asleep, ‘involuntary ideas’ emerge, owing to the relaxation of a certain deliberate (and no doubt also critical)activity which we allow to inﬂuence the course of our ideas while we areawake. (We usually attribute this relaxation to ‘fatigue.’) As the involuntaryideas emerge they change into visual and acoustic images. (Cf. the remarksby Schleiermacher and others quoted above on pp. 78 f. [and 99 f.].)
1In
the state used for the analysis of dreams and pathological ideas, the patientpurposely and deliberately abandons this activity and employs the psychicalenergy thus saved (or a portion of it) in attentively following the involun-tary thoughts which now emerge, and which—and here the situation dif-fers from that of falling asleep—retain the character of ideas. In this way the
‘involuntary ’ideas are transformed into ‘voluntary ’ones.
The adoption
2of the required attitude of mind towards ideas that seem
to emerge ‘of their own free will’ and the abandonment of the criticalfunction that is normally in operation against them seem to be hard ofachievement for some people. The ‘involuntary thoughts’ are liable to re-lease a most violent resistance, which seeks to prevent their emergence. Ifwe may trust that great poet and philosopher Friedrich Schiller, however,poetic creation must demand an exactly similar attitude. In a passage inhis correspondence with Körner—we have to thank Otto Rank for un-earthing it—Schiller (writing on December 1, 1788) replies to his friend’scomplaint of insufﬁcient productivity: ‘The ground for your complaint127 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1919:] Silberer (1909, 1910 and 1912) has made important
contributions to dream-interpretation by directly observing this transformation
of ideas into visual images. [See below, pp. 358 f. and 507 f.]
2 [This paragraph was added in 1909, and the ﬁrst sentence of the next paragraph
modiﬁed accordingly.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 127seems to me to lie in the constraint imposed by your reason upon your
imagination. I will make my idea more concrete by a simile. It seems a badthing and detrimental to the creative work of the mind if Reason makestoo close an examination of the ideas as they come pouring in—at the verygateway, as it were. Looked at in isolation, a thought may seem very trivialor very fantastic; but it may be made important by another thought thatcomes after it, and, in conjunction with other thoughts that may seemequally absurd, it may turn out to form a most effective link. Reason can-not form any opinion upon all this unless it retains the thought longenough to look at it in connection with the others. On the other hand,where there is a creative mind, Reason—so it seems to me—relaxes itswatch upon the gates, and the ideas rush in pell-mell, and only then doesit look them through and examine them in a mass.—You critics, or what-ever else you may call yourselves, are ashamed or frightened of the mo-mentary and transient extravagances which are to be found in all trulycreative minds and whose longer or shorter duration distinguishes thethinking artist from the dreamer. You complain of your unfruitfulness be-cause you reject too soon and discriminate too severely.’
Nevertheless what Schiller describes as a relaxation of the watch upon the
gates of Reason, the adoption of an attitude of uncritical self- observation,is by no means difﬁcult. Most of my patients achieve it after their ﬁrst in-structions. I myself can do so very completely, by the help of writing downmy ideas as they occur to me. The amount of psychical energy by which itis possible to reduce critical activity and increase the intensity of self- observation varies considerably according to the subject on which one is try-ing to ﬁx one’s attention.
Our ﬁrst step in the employment of this procedure teaches us that what
we must take as the object of our attention is not the dream as a whole butthe separate portions of its content. If I say to a patient who is still anovice: ‘What occurs to you in connection with this dream?’ as a rule hismental horizon becomes a blank. If, however, I put the dream before himcut up into pieces, he will give me a series of associations to each piece,which might be described as the ‘background thoughts’ of that  particularpart of the dream. Thus the method of dream-interpretation which I prac-tise already differs in this ﬁrst important respect from the popular, historicand legendary method of interpretation by means of symbolism and ap-proximates to the second or ‘decoding’ method. Like the latter, it employsinterpretation en détail and not en masse ; like the latter, it regards dreams128 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 128from the very ﬁrst as being of a composite character, as being conglomer-
ates of psychical formations. [Cf. pp. 427 f. and 457.]1
In the course of my psycho-analyses of neurotics I must already haveanalysed over a thousand dreams; but I do not propose to make use of thismaterial in my present introduction to the technique and theory of dream-interpretation. Apart from the fact that such a course would be open to theobjection that these are the dreams of neuropaths, from which no valid in-ferences could be made as to the dreams of normal people, there is quiteanother reason which forces this decision upon me. The subject to whichthese dreams of my patients lead up is always, of course, the case historywhich underlies their neurosis. Each dream would therefore necessitate alengthy introduction and an investigation of the nature and aetiologicaldeterminants of the psychoneuroses. But these questions are in themselvesnovelties and highly bewildering and would distract attention from theproblem of dreams. On the contrary, it is my intention to make use of mypresent elucidation of dreams as a preliminary step towards solving themore difﬁcult problems of the psychology of the neuroses.
2If, however, I
forego my principal material, the dreams of my neurotic patients, I mustnot be too particular about what is left to me. All that remains are suchdreams as have been reported to me from time to time by normal personsof my acquaintance, and such others as have been quoted as instances inthe literature dealing with dream-life. Unluckily, however, none of thesedreams are accompanied by the analysis without which I cannot discovera dream’s meaning. My procedure is not so convenient as the popular de-coding method which translates any given piece of a dream’s content by aﬁxed key. I, on the contrary, am prepared to ﬁnd that the same piece of129 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [The technique of dream-interpretation is further discussed below (p. 526 ff.).
See also the ﬁrst two sections of Freud (1923 c). The quite other question of the
part played by dream-interpretation in the technique of therapeutic psycho-
analysis is considered in Freud (1911 e).]
2 [At the beginning of Section E of Chapter VII, Freud reﬂects upon the difﬁculties
imposed upon his exposition of the subject by this programme, which is alreadylaid down in his preface to the ﬁrst edition (p. xxiii). As he points out on p. 170 f.and again on p. 175 n., he is often led into disregarding it. In spite of his declared
intention, he makes use of many of his patients’ dreams, and more than once (e.g.on p. 173 f.) enters into a discussion of the mechanism of neurotic symptoms.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 129content may conceal a different meaning when it occurs in various people
or in various contexts. Thus it comes about that I am led to my owndreams, which offer a copious and convenient material, derived from anapproximately normal person and relating to multifarious occasions ofdaily life. No doubt I shall be met by doubts of the trustworthiness of ‘self-analyses’ of this kind; and I shall be told that they leave the door open toarbitrary conclusions. In my judgement the situation is in fact morefavourable in the case of self-observation than in that of other people; at all
events we may make the experiment and see how far self-analysis takes uswith the interpretation of dreams. But I have other difﬁculties to over-come, which lie within myself. There is some natural hesitation about re-vealing so many intimate facts about one’s mental life; nor can there beany guarantee against misinterpretation by strangers. But it must be possi-ble to overcome such hesitations. ‘Tout psychologiste,’ writes Delboeuf[1885], ‘est obligé de faire l’aveu même de ses faiblesses s’il croit par là jeterdu jour sur quelque problème obscur.’
1And it is safe to assume that my
readers too will very soon ﬁnd their initial interest in the indiscretionswhich I am bound to make replaced by an absorbing immersion in thepsychological problems upon which they throw light.
2
Accordingly I shall proceed to choose out one of my own dreams and
demonstrate upon it my method of interpretation. In the case of everysuch dream some remarks by way of preamble will be necessary.—Andnow I must ask the reader to make my interests his own for quite a while,and to plunge, along with me, into the minutest details of my life; for atransference of this kind is peremptorily demanded by our interest in thehidden meaning of dreams.
Preamble
During the summer of 1895 I had been giving psychoanalytic treatmentto a young lady who was on very friendly terms with me and my family.It will be readily understood that a mixed relationship such as this may130 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [‘Every psychologist is under an obligation to confess even his own weaknesses,
if he thinks that it may throw light upon some obscure problem.’]
2 I am obliged to add, however, by way of qualiﬁcation of what I have said above,
that in scarcely any instance have I brought forward the complete interpretation
of one of my own dreams, as it is known to me. I have probably been wise in
not putting too much faith in my readers’ discretion.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 130be a source of many disturbed feelings in a physician and particularly in
a psychotherapist. While the physician’s personal interest is greater, hisauthority is less; any failure would bring a threat to the old-establishedfriendship with the patient’s family. This treatment had ended in a partialsuccess; the patient was relieved of her hysterical anxiety but did not loseall her somatic symptoms. At that time I was not yet quite clear in mymind as to the criteria indicating that a hysterical case history was ﬁnallyclosed, and I proposed a solution to the patient which she seemed unwill-ing to accept. While we were thus at variance, we had broken off thetreatment for the summer vacation.—One day I had a visit from a juniorcolleague, one of my oldest friends, who had been staying with my pa-tient, Irma, and her family at their country resort. I asked him how hehad found her and he answered: ‘She’s better, but not quite well.’ I wasconscious that my friend Otto’s words, or the tone in which he spokethem, annoyed me. I fancied I detected a reproof in them, such as to theeffect that I had promised the patient too much; and, whether rightly orwrongly, I attributed the supposed fact of Otto’s siding against me to theinﬂuence of my patient’s relatives, who, as it seemed to me, had neverlooked with favour on the treatment. However, my disagreeable impres-sion was not clear to me and I gave no outward sign of it. The same eve -ning I wrote out Irma’s case history, with the idea of giving it to Dr. M.(a common friend who was at that time the leading ﬁgure in our circle)in order to justify myself. That night (or more probably the next morn-ing) I had the following dream, which I noted down immediately afterwaking.
1
Dream of July 23rd–24th, 1895
A large hall—numerous guests, whom we were receiving.—Among them
was Irma. I at once took her on one side, as though to answer her letter and toreproach her for not having accepted my ‘solution’ yet. I said to her: ‘If you stillget pains, it’s really only your fault.’ She replied: ‘If you only knew what pains131 II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream
1 [Footnote added 1914:] This is the ﬁrst dream which I submitted to a detailed
interpretation. [Freud describes some ﬁrst groping attempts at the analysis of his
own dreams in Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and Freud, 1895). They will be found
mentioned in the course of the long footnote attached to the entry of May 15in the Case History of Frau Emmy von N. This passage is quoted in full in theEditor’s Introduction (pp. xiii f.).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 131I’ve got now in my throat and stomach and abdomen—it’s choking me’—I
was alarmed and looked at her. She looked pale and puffy. I thought to myselfthat after all I must be missing some organic trouble. I took her to the windowand looked down her throat, and she showed signs of recalcitrance, like womenwith artiﬁcial dentures. I thought to myself that there was really no need forher to do that.—She then opened her mouth properly and on the right I founda big white
1patch; at another place I saw extensive whitish grey scabs upon
some remarkable curly structures which were evidently modelled on theturbinal bones of the nose.—I at once called in Dr. M., and he repeated theexamination and conﬁrmed it. . . . Dr. M. looked quite different from usual;he was very pale, he walked with a limp and his chin was clean-shaven. . . .My friend Otto was now standing beside her as well, and my friend Leopoldwas percussing her through her bodice and saying: ‘She has a dull area lowdown on the left. ’ He also indicated that a portion of the skin on the left shoul-der was inﬁltrated. (I noticed this, just as he did, in spite of her dress.) . . . M.said: ‘There’s no doubt it’s an infection, but no matter; dysentery will super-vene and the toxin will be eliminated. ’ . . . We were directly aware, too, of theorigin of her infection. Not long before, when she was feeling unwell, myfriend Otto had given her an injection of a preparation of propyl, propyls . . .propionic acid . . . trimethylamin (and I saw before me the formula for thisprinted in heavy type). . . . Injections of that sort ought not to be made sothoughtlessly. . . . And probably the syringe had not been clean.
This dream has one advantage over many others. It was immediately
clear what events of the previous day provided its starting-point. My pre-amble makes that plain. The news which Otto had given me of Irma’scondition and the case history which I had been engaged in writing tillfar into the night continued to occupy my mental activity even after I wasasleep. Nevertheless, no one who had only read the preamble and thecontent of the dream itself could have the slightest notion of what thedream meant. I myself had no notion. I was astonished at the symptomsof which Irma complained to me in the dream, since they were not thesame as those for which I had treated her. I smiled at the senseless idea ofan injection of propionic acid and at Dr. M.’s consoling reﬂections. To-wards its end the dream seemed to me to be more obscure and com-pressed than it was at the beginning. In order to discover the meaning ofall this it was necessary to undertake a detailed analysis.132 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [The word ‘white’ is omitted, no doubt accidentally, in the 1942 edition only.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 132Analysis
The hall—numerous guests, whom we were receiving. We were spending
that summer at Bellevue, a house standing by itself on one of the hills ad-
joining the Kahlenberg.1The house had formerly been designed as a
place of entertainment and its reception-rooms were in consequence un-usually lofty and hall-like. It was at Bellevue that I had the dream, a fewdays before my wife’s birthday. On the previous day my wife had told methat she expected that a number of friends, including Irma, would becoming out to visit us on her birthday. My dream was thus anticipatingthis occasion: it was my wife’s birthday and a number of guests, includingIrma, were being received by us in the large hall at Bellevue.
I reproached Irma for not having accepted my solution; I said: ‘If you still
get pains, it’s your own fault. ’ I might have said this to her in waking life,
and I may actually have done so. It was my view at that time (though Ihave since recognized it as a wrong one) that my task was fulﬁlled when Ihad informed a patient of the hidden meaning of his symptoms: I con-sidered that I was not responsible for whether he accepted the solution ornot—though this was what success depended on. I owe it to this mistake,which I have now fortunately corrected, that my life was made easier at atime when, in spite of all my inevitable ignorance, I was expected to pro-duce therapeutic successes.—I noticed, however, that the words which Ispoke to Irma in the dream showed that I was specially anxious not to beresponsible for the pains which she still had. If they were her fault theycould not be mine. Could it be that the purpose of the dream lay in thisdirection?
Irma’s complaint: pains in her throat and abdomen and stomach; it was
choking her. Pains in the stomach were among my patient’s symptoms but
were not very prominent; she complained more of feelings of nausea anddisgust. Pains in the throat and abdomen and constriction of the throatplayed scarcely any part in her illness. I wondered why I decided uponthis choice of symptoms in the dream but could not think of any expla-nation at the moment.
She looked pale and puffy. My patient always had a rosy complexion. I
began to suspect that someone else was being substituted for her.
I was alarmed at the idea that I had missed an organic illness. This, as
may well be believed, is a perpetual source of anxiety to a specialist whose133 II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream
1 [A hill which is a favourite resort in the immediate neighbourhood of Vienna.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 133practice is almost limited to neurotic patients and who is in the habit of
attributing to hysteria a great number of symptoms which other physi-cians treat as organic. On the other hand, a faint doubt crept into mymind—from where, I could not tell—that my alarm was not entirely gen-uine. If Irma’s pains had an organic basis, once again I could not be heldresponsible for curing them; my treatment only set out to get rid of hys-
terical pains. It occurred to me, in fact, that I was actually wishing that
there had been a wrong diagnosis; for, if so, the blame for my lack of suc-cess would also have been got rid of.
I took her to the window to look down her throat. She showed some re-
calcitrance, like women with false teeth. I thought to myself that really therewas no need for her to do that. I had never had any occasion to examine
Irma’s oral cavity. What happened in the dream reminded me of an ex-amination I had carried out some time before of a governess: at a ﬁrstglance she had seemed a picture of youthful beauty, but when it came toopening her mouth she had taken measures to conceal her plates. This ledto recollections of other medical examinations and of little secrets re-vealed in the course of them—to the satisfaction of neither party. ‘There
was really no need for her to do that’ was no doubt intended in the ﬁrst
place as a compliment to Irma; but I suspected that it had another mean-ing besides. (If one carries out an analysis attentively, one gets a feeling ofwhether or not one has exhausted all the background thoughts that are tobe expected.) The way in which Irma stood by the window suddenly re-minded me of another experience. Irma had an intimate woman friendof whom I had a very high opinion. When I visited this lady one eveningI had found her by a window in the situation reproduced in the dream,and her physician, the same Dr. M., had pronounced that she had a diph-theritic membrane. The ﬁgure of Dr. M. and the membrane reappearlater in the dream. It now occurred to me that for the last few months Ihad had every reason to suppose that this other lady was also a hysteric.Indeed, Irma herself had betrayed the fact to me. What did I know of hercondition? One thing precisely: that, like my Irma of the dream, she suf-fered from hysterical choking. So in the dream I had replaced my patientby her friend. I now recollected that I had often played with the idea thatshe too might ask me to relieve her of her symptoms. I myself, however,had thought this unlikely, since she was of a very reserved nature. She wasrecalcitrant , as was shown in the dream. Another reason was that there was
no need for her to do it: she had so far shown herself strong enough to mas-134 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 134ter her condition without outside help. There still remained a few features
that I could not attach either to Irma or to her friend: pale; puffy; false
teeth. The false teeth took me to the governess whom I have already men-
tioned; I now felt inclined to be satisﬁed with badteeth. I then thought
of someone else to whom these features might be alluding. She again wasnot one of my patients, nor should I have liked to have her as a patient,since I had noticed that she was bashful in my presence and I could notthink she would make an amenable patient. She was usually pale, andonce, while she had been in specially good health, she had looked puffy.
1
Thus I had been comparing my patient Irma with two other people whowould also have been recalcitrant to treatment. What could the reasonhave been for my having exchanged her in the dream for her friend? Per-haps it was that I should have liked to exchange her: either I felt more
sympathetic towards her friend or had a higher opinion of her intelli-gence. For Irma seemed to me foolish because she had not accepted mysolution. Her friend would have been wiser, that is to say she would haveyielded sooner. She would then have opened her mouth properly, and have
told me more than Irma.
2
What I saw in her throat: a white patch and turbinal bones with scabs on
them. The white patch reminded me of diphtheritis and so of Irma’s
friend, but also of a serious illness of my eldest daughter’s almost two yearsearlier and of the fright I had had in those anxious days. The scabs on theturbinal bones recalled a worry about my own state of health. I was mak-ing frequent use of cocaine at that time to reduce some troublesome nasalswellings, and I had heard a few days earlier that one of my women pa-tients who had followed my example had developed an extensive necrosis135 II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream
1 The still unexplained complaint about pains in the abdomen could also be traced
back to this third ﬁgure. The person in question was, of course, my own wife;
the pains in the abdomen reminded me of one of the occasions on which I hadnoticed her bashfulness. I was forced to admit to myself that I was not treatingeither Irma or my wife very kindly in this dream; but it should be observed byway of excuse that I was measuring them both by the standard of the good andamenable patient.
2 I had a feeling that the interpretation of this part of the dream was not carried far
enough to make it possible to follow the whole of its concealed meaning. If I hadpursued my comparison between the three women, it would have taken me faraﬁeld.—There is at least one spot in every dream at which it is unplumbable—anavel, as it were, that is its point of contact with the unknown. [Cf. p. 528.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 135of the nasal mucous membrane. I had been the ﬁrst to recommend the use
of cocaine, in 1885,1and this recommendation had brought serious re-
proaches down on me. The misuse of that drug had hastened the death ofa dear friend of mine. This had been before 1895 [the date of the dream].
I at once called in Dr. M., and he repeated the examination. This simply
corresponded to the position occupied by M. in our circle. But the ‘at
once’ was sufﬁciently striking to require a special explanation.
2It re-
minded me of a tragic event in my practice. I had on one occasion pro-duced a severe toxic state in a woman patient by repeatedly prescribingwhat was at that time regarded as a harmless remedy (sulphonal), and hadhurriedly turned for assistance and support to my experienced senior col-league. There was a subsidiary detail which conﬁrmed the idea that I hadthis incident in mind. My patient—who succumbed to the poison—hadthe same name as my eldest daughter. It had never occurred to me before,but it struck me now almost like an act of retribution on the part of des-tiny. It was as though the replacement of one person by another was to becontinued in another sense: this Mathilde for that Mathilde, an eye foran eye and a tooth for a tooth. It seemed as if I had been collecting all theoccasions which I could bring up against myself as evidence of lack ofmedical conscientiousness.
Dr. M. was pale, had a clean-shaven chin and walked with a limp. This
was true to the extent that his unhealthy appearance often caused hisfriends anxiety. The two other features could only apply to someone else.I thought of my elder brother, who lives abroad, who is clean-shaven andwhom, if I remembered right, the M. of the dream closely resembled. Wehad had news a few days earlier that he was walking with a limp owing toan arthritic affection of his hip. There must, I reﬂected, have been somereason for my fusing into one the two ﬁgures in the dream. I then re-membered that I had a similar reason for being in an ill-humour witheach of them: they had both rejected a certain suggestion I had recentlylaid before them.136 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [This is a misprint (which occurs in every German edition) for ‘1884,’ the date
of Freud’s ﬁrst paper on cocaine. A full account of Freud’s work in connection
with cocaine will be found in Chapter VI of the ﬁrst volume of Ernest Jones’s lifeof Freud. From this it appears that the ‘dear friend’ was Fleischl von Marxow (seep. 487 n .). Further indirect allusions to this episode will be found on pp. 194 f.,
228, 237 f. and 490.]
2 [See below, p. 517.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 136My friend Otto was now standing beside the patient and my friend
Leopold was examining her and indicated that there was a dull area low
down on the left . My friend Leopold was also a physician and a relative of
Otto’s. Since they both specialized in the same branch of medicine, it wastheir fate to be in competition with each other, and comparisons wereconstantly being drawn between them. Both of them acted as my assis-tants for years while I was still in charge of the neurological out-patients’department of a children’s hospital.
1Scenes such as the one represented
in the dream used often to occur there. While I was discussing the diag-nosis of a case with Otto, Leopold would be examining the child oncemore and would make an unexpected contribution to our decision. Thedifference between their characters was like that between the bailiff Bräsigand his friend Karl:
2one was distinguished for his quickness, while the
other was slow but sure. If in the dream I was contrasting Otto with theprudent Leopold, I was evidently doing so to the advantage of the latter.The comparison was similar to the one between my disobedient patientIrma and the friend whom I regarded as wiser than she was. I now per-ceived another of the lines along which the chain of thought in the dreambranched off: from the sick child to the children’s hospital.— The dull
area low down on the left seemed to me to agree in every detail with one
particular case in which Leopold had struck me by his thoroughness. Ialso had a vague notion of something in the nature of a metastatic affec-tion; but this may also have been a reference to the patient whom Ishould have liked to have in the place of Irma. So far as I had been ableto judge, she had produced an imitation of a tuberculosis.
A portion of the skin on the left shoulder was inﬁltrated. I saw at once
that this was the rheumatism in my own shoulder, which I invariably no-tice if I sit up late into the night. Moreover the wording in the dream wasmost ambiguous: ‘ I noticed this, just as he did. . . .’ I noticed it in my own
body, that is. I was struck, too, by the unusual phrasing: ‘a portion of theskin was inﬁltrated.’ We are in the habit of speaking of ‘a left upper pos-terior inﬁltration,’ and this would refer to the lung and so once more totuberculosis.137 II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream
1 [For details of this hospital see Section II of Kris’s introduction to the Fliess cor-
respondence (Freud, 1950 a).]
2 [The two chief ﬁgures in the once popular novel, Ut mine Stromtid , written in
Mecklenburg dialect, by Fritz Reuter (1862–4). There is an English translation,
An Old Story of My Farming Days (London, 1878).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 137In spite of her dress. This was in any case only an interpolation. We nat-
urally used to examine the children in the hospital undressed: and this
would be a contrast to the manner in which adult female patients have tobe examined. I remembered that it was said of a celebrated clinician thathe never made a physical examination of his patients except through theirclothes. Further than this I could not see. Frankly, I had no desire to pen-etrate more deeply at this point.
Dr. M. said: ‘It’s an infection, but no matter. Dysentery will supervene and
the toxin will be eliminated.’ At ﬁrst this struck me as ridiculous. But nev-
ertheless, like all the rest, it had to be carefully analysed. When I came tolook at it more closely it seemed to have some sort of meaning all thesame. What I discovered in the patient was a local diphtheritis. I remem-bered from the time of my daughter’s illness a discussion on diphtheritisand diphtheria, the latter being the general infection that arises from thelocal diphtheritis. Leopold indicated the presence of a general infection ofthis kind from the existence of a dull area, which might thus be regardedas a metastatic focus. I seemed to think, it is true, that metastases like thisdo not in fact occur with diphtheria: it made me think rather of pyaemia.
No matter. This was intended as a consolation. It seemed to ﬁt into the
context as follows. The content of the preceding part of the dream had beenthat my patient’s pains were due to a severe organic affection. I had a feelingthat I was only trying in that way to shift the blame from myself. Psycho-logical treatment could not be held responsible for the persistence of diph-theritic pains. Nevertheless I had a sense of awkwardness at having inventedsuch a severe illness for Irma simply in order to clear myself. It looked socruel. Thus I was in need of an assurance that all would be well in the end,and it seemed to me that to have put the consolation into the mouth pre-cisely of Dr. M. had not been a bad choice. But here I was taking up a su-perior attitude towards the dream, and this itself required  explanation.
And why was the consolation so nonsensical?Dysentery. There seemed to be some remote theoretical notion that
morbid matter can be eliminated through the bowels. Could it be that Iwas trying to make fun of Dr. M.’s fertility in producing far-fetched ex-planations and making unexpected pathological connections? Somethingelse now occurred to me in relation to dysentery. A few months earlier Ihad taken on the case of a young man with remarkable difﬁculties associ-ated with defaecating, who had been treated by other physicians as a caseof ‘anaemia accompanied by malnutrition.’ I had recognized it as a hys-teria, but had been unwilling to try him with my psychotherapeutic treat-138 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 138ment and had sent him on a sea voyage. Some days before, I had had a
despairing letter from him from Egypt, saying that he had had a fresh at-tack there which a doctor had declared was dysentery. I suspected that thediagnosis was an error on the part of an ignorant practitioner who had al-lowed himself to be taken in by the hysteria. But I could not help re-proaching myself for having put my patient in a situation in which hemight have contracted some organic trouble on top of his hysterical in-testinal disorder. Moreover ‘dysentery’ sounds not unlike ‘diphtheria’—aword of ill omen which did not occur in the dream.
1
Yes, I thought to myself, I must have been making fun of Dr. M. with
the consoling prognosis ‘Dysentery will supervene,’ etc.: for it came backto me that, years before, he himself had told an amusing story of a similarkind about another doctor. Dr. M. had been called in by him for consul-tation over a patient who was seriously ill, and had felt obliged to pointout, in view of the very optimistic view taken by his colleague, that hehad found albumen in the patient’s urine. The other, however, was notin the least put out: ‘ No matter,’ he had said, ‘the albumen will soon be
eliminated!’—I could no longer feel any doubt, therefore, that this partof the dream was expressing derision at physicians who are ignorant ofhysteria. And, as though to conﬁrm this, a further idea crossed my mind:‘Does Dr. M. realize that the symptoms in his patient (Irma’s friend)which give grounds for fearing tuberculosis also have a hysterical basis?Has he spotted this hysteria? or has he been taken in by it?’
But what could be my motive for treating this friend of mine so badly?
That was a very simple matter. Dr. M. was just as little in agreement withmy ‘solution’ as Irma herself. So I had already revenged myself in thisdream on two people: on Irma with the words ‘If you still get pains, it’syour own fault,’ and on Dr. M. by the wording of the nonsensical conso-lation that I put into his mouth.
We were directly aware of the origin of the infection. This direct knowl-
edge in the dream was remarkable. Only just before we had had noknowledge of it, for the infection was only revealed by Leopold.
When she was feeling unwell, my friend Otto had given her an injection.
Otto had in fact told me that during his short stay with Irma’s family he hadbeen called in to a neighbouring hotel to give an injection to someone whohad suddenly felt unwell. These injections reminded me once more of my139 II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream
1 [The German words ‘ Dysenterie’ and ‘ Diphtherie’ are more alike than the English
ones.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 139unfortunate friend who had poisoned himself with cocaine [see p. 136 n .]. I
had advised him to use the drug internally [i.e. orally] only, while morphia
was being withdrawn; but he had at once given himself  cocaine injections.
A preparation of propyl . . . propyls . . . propionic acid. How could I have
come to think of this? During the previous evening, before I wrote outthe case history and had the dream, my wife had opened a bottle ofliqueur, on which the word ‘Ananas’
1appeared and which was a gift from
our friend Otto: for he has a habit of making presents on every possibleoccasion. It was to be hoped, I thought to myself, that some day he wouldﬁnd a wife to cure him of the habit.
2This liqueur gave off such a strong
smell of fusel oil that I refused to touch it. My wife suggested our givingthe bottle to the servants, but I—with even greater prudence—vetoed thesuggestion, adding in a philanthropic spirit that there was no need forthem to be poisoned either. The smell of fusel oil (amyl . . .) evidently
stirred up in my mind a recollection of the whole series—propyl, methyl,and so on—and this accounted for the propyl preparation in the dream.It is true that I carried out a substitution in the process: I dreamt ofpropyl after having smelt amyl. But substitutions of this kind are perhapslegitimate in organic chemistry.
Trimethylamin. I saw the chemical formula of this substance in my
dream, which bears witness to a great effort on the part of my memory.Moreover the formula was printed in heavy type, as though there hadbeen a desire to lay emphasis on some part of the context as being of quitespecial importance. What was it, then, to which my attention was to bedirected in this way by trimethylamin? It was to a conversation with an-other friend who had for many years been familiar with all my writingsduring the period of their gestation, just as I had been with his.
3He had
at that time conﬁded some ideas to me on the subject of the chemistry of140 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 I must add that the sound of the word ‘Ananas’ bears a remarkable resemblance
to that of my patient Irma’s family name.
2 [Footnote added 1909, but omitted again from 1925 onwards:] In this respect the
dream did not turn out to be prophetic. But in another respect it was. For my
patient’s ‘unsolved’ gastric pains, for which I was so anxious not to be blamed,
turned out to be the forerunners of a serious disorder caused by gall-stones.
3 [This was Wilhelm Fliess, the Berlin biologist and nose and throat specialist,
who exercised a great inﬂuence on Freud during the years immediately precedingthe publication of this book, and who ﬁgures frequently, though as a rule anony-mously, in its pages. See Freud (1950 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 140the sexual processes, and had mentioned among other things that he be-
lieved that one of the products of sexual metabolism was trimethylamin.Thus this substance led me to sexuality, the factor to which I attributedthe greatest importance in the origin of the nervous disorders which itwas my aim to cure. My patient Irma was a young widow; if I wanted toﬁnd an excuse for the failure of my treatment in her case, what I couldbest appeal to would no doubt be this fact of her widowhood, which herfriends would be so glad to see changed. And how strangely, I thought tomyself, a dream like this is put together! The other woman, whom I hadas a patient in the dream instead of Irma, was also a young widow.
I began to guess why the formula for trimethylamin had been so
prominent in the dream. So many important subjects converged uponthat one word. T rimethylamin was an allusion not only to the immenselypowerful factor of sexuality, but also to a person whose agreement I re-called with satisfaction whenever I felt isolated in my opinions. Surely thisfriend who played so large a part in my life must appear again elsewherein these trains of thought. Yes. For he had a special knowledge of the con-sequences of affections of the nose and its accessory cavities; and he haddrawn scientiﬁc attention to some very remarkable connections betweenthe turbinal bones and the female organs of sex. (Cf. the three curly struc-tures in Irma’s throat.) I had had Irma examined by him to see whetherher gastric pains might be of nasal origin. But he suffered himself fromsuppurative rhinitis, which caused me anxiety; and no doubt there was anallusion to this in the pyaemia which vaguely came into my mind in con-nection with the metastases in the dream.
1
Injections of that sort ought not to be made so thoughtlessly. Here an ac-
cusation of thoughtlessness was being made directly against my friendOtto. I seemed to remember thinking something of the same kind thatafternoon when his words and looks had appeared to show that he wassiding against me. It had been some such notion as: ‘How easily histhoughts are inﬂuenced! How thoughtlessly he jumps to conclusions!’—Apart from this, this sentence in the dream reminded me once more ofmy dead friend who had so hastily resorted to cocaine injections. AsI have said, I had never contemplated the drug being given by injection.141 II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream
1 [The analysis of this part of the dream is further elaborated below (pp. 310 ff.).
It had already been used by Freud as an example of the mechanism of displace-
ment in Section 21 of Part I of his very early ‘Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology,’written in the autumn of 1895 and printed as an Appendix to Freud (1950 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 141I noticed too that in accusing Otto of thoughtlessness in handling chem-
ical substances I was once more touching upon the story of the unfortu-nate Mathilde, which gave grounds for the same accusation againstmyself. Here I was evidently collecting instances of my conscientiousness,but also of the reverse.
And probably the syringe had not been clean. This was yet another accu-
sation against Otto, but derived from a different source. I had happenedthe day before to meet the son of an old lady of eighty-two, to whom Ihad to give an injection of morphia twice a day.
1At the moment she was
in the country and he told me that she was suffering from phlebitis. I hadat once thought it must be an inﬁltration caused by a dirty syringe. I wasproud of the fact that in two years I had not caused a single inﬁltration; Itook constant pains to be sure that the syringe was clean. In short, I wasconscientious. The phlebitis brought me back once more to my wife, whohad suffered from thrombosis during one of her pregnancies; and nowthree similar situations came to my recollection involving my wife, Irmaand the dead Mathilde. The identity of these situations had evidently en-abled me to substitute the three ﬁgures for one another in the dream.
I have now completed the interpretation of the dream.
2While I was
carrying it out I had some difﬁculty in keeping at bay all the ideas whichwere bound to be provoked by a comparison between the content of thedream and the concealed thoughts lying behind it. And in the meantimethe ‘meaning’ of the dream was borne in upon me. I became aware of anintention which was carried into effect by the dream and which musthave been my motive for dreaming it. The dream fulﬁlled certain wisheswhich were started in me by the events of the previous evening (the newsgiven me by Otto and my writing out of the case history). The conclu-sion of the dream, that is to say, was that I was not responsible for the per-sistence of Irma’s pains, but that Otto was. Otto had in fact annoyed meby his remarks about Irma’s incomplete cure, and the dream gave me myrevenge by throwing the reproach back on to him. The dream acquitted142 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [This old lady makes frequent appearances in Freud’s writings at this period. See
below, pp. 258 f., and The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b ), Chapter
VIII (band g)and Chapter VII (Cb ).Her death is reported in a letter to Fliess
of July 8, 1901 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 145).]
2 [Footnote added 1909:] Though it will be understood that I have not reported
everything that occurred to me during the process of interpretation.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 142me of the responsibility for Irma’s condition by showing that it was due
to other factors—it produced a whole series of reasons. The dream repre-sented a particular state of affairs as I should have wished it to be. Thus
its content was the fulﬁlment of a wish and its motive was a wish.
Thus much leapt to the eyes. But many of the details of the dream also
became intelligible to me from the point of view of wish-fulﬁlment. Notonly did I revenge myself on Otto for being too hasty in taking sidesagainst me by representing him as being too hasty in his medical treat-ment (in giving the injection); but I also revenged myself on him for giv-ing me the bad liqueur which had an aroma of fusel oil. And in the dreamI found an expression which united the two reproaches: the injection wasof a preparation of propyl. This did not satisfy me and I pursued my re-venge further by contrasting him with his more trustworthy competitor.I seemed to be saying: ‘I like him better than you. ’ But Otto was not the
only person to suffer from the vials of my wrath. I took revenge as well onmy disobedient patient by exchanging her for one who was wiser and lessrecalcitrant. Nor did I allow Dr. M. to escape the consequences of hiscontradiction but showed him by means of a clear allusion that he wasan ignoramus on the subject. (‘ Dysentery will supervene,’ etc.) Indeed I
seemed to be appealing from him to someone else with greater knowledge(to my friend who had told me of trimethylamin) just as I had turnedfrom Irma to her friend and from Otto to Leopold. ‘Take these peopleaway! Give me three others of my choice instead! Then I shall be free ofthese undeserved reproaches!’ The groundlessness of the reproaches wasproved for me in the dream in the most elaborate fashion. Iwas not to
blame for Irma’s pains, since she herself was to blame for them by refusingto accept my solution. I was not concerned with Irma’s pains, since they
were of an organic nature and quite incurable by psychological treatment.Irma’s pains could be satisfactorily explained by her widowhood (cf. thetrimethylamin) which Ihad no means of altering. Irma’s pains had been
caused by Otto giving her an incautious injection of an unsuitable drug—a thing I should never have done. Irma’s pains were the result of an injec-
tion with a dirty needle, like my old lady’s phlebitis—whereas Inever did
any harm with my injections. I noticed, it is true, that these explanationsof Irma’s pains (which agreed in exculpating me) were not entirely con-sistent with one another, and indeed that they were mutually exclusive.The whole plea—for the dream was nothing else—reminded one vividlyof the defence put forward by the man who was charged by one of hisneighbours with having given him back a borrowed kettle in a damaged143 II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 143condition. The defendant asserted ﬁrst, that he had given it back undam-
aged; secondly, that the kettle had a hole in it when he borrowed it; andthirdly, that he had never borrowed a kettle from his neighbour at all. Somuch the better: if only a single one of these three lines of defence wereto be accepted as valid, the man would have to be acquitted.
1
Certain other themes played a part in the dream, which were not so
obviously connected with my exculpation from Irma’s illness: my daugh-ter’s illness and that of my patient who bore the same name, the injuriouseffect of cocaine, the disorder of my patient who was travelling in Egypt,my concern about my wife’s health and about that of my brother and ofDr. M., my own physical ailments, my anxiety about my absent friendwho suffered from suppurative rhinitis. But when I came to consider allof these, they could all be collected into a single group of ideas and la-belled, as it were, ‘concern about my own and other people’s health—professional conscientiousness.’ I called to mind the obscure disagreeableimpression I had when Otto brought me the news of Irma’s condition.This group of thoughts that played a part in the dream enabled me retro-spectively to put this transient impression into words. It was as though hehad said to me: ‘You don’t take your medical duties seriously enough.You’re not conscientious; you don’t carry out what you’ve undertaken.’Thereupon, this group of thoughts seemed to have put itself at my dis-posal, so that I could produce evidence of how highly conscientious I was,of how deeply I was concerned about the health of my relations, myfriends and my patients. It was a noteworthy fact that this material alsoincluded some disagreeable memories, which supported my friend Otto’saccusation rather than my own vindication. The material was, as onemight say, impartial; but nevertheless there was an unmistakable connec-tion between this more extensive group of thoughts which underlay thedream and the narrower subject of the dream which gave rise to the wishto be innocent of Irma’s illness.
I will not pretend that I have completely uncovered the meaning of
this dream or that its interpretation is without a gap. I could spend muchmore time over it, derive further information from it and discuss freshproblems raised by it. I myself know the points from which further trainsof thought could be followed. But considerations which arise in the case144 II. The Method of Interpreting Dreams
1 [This anecdote is discussed by Freud in relation to this passage in Chapter II,
Section 8, and Chapter VII, Section 2, of his book on jokes. (Freud, 1905 c.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 144of every dream of my own restrain me from pursuing my interpretative
work. If anyone should feel tempted to express a hasty condemnation ofmy reticence, I would advise him to make the experiment of beingfranker than I am. For the moment I am satisﬁed with the achievementof this one piece of fresh knowledge. If we adopt the method of interpret-ing dreams which I have indicated here, we shall ﬁnd that dreams reallyhave a meaning and are far from being the expression of a fragmentaryactivity of the brain, as the authorities have claimed. When the work of in-terpretation has been completed, we perceive that a dream is the fulﬁlment ofa wish.
1145 II. Analysis of a Specimen Dream
In This House, on July 24th, 1895 
the Secret of Dreams was Revealed 
to Dr. Sigm. Freud1 [In a letter to Fliess on June 12, 1900 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 137), Freud de-
scribes a later visit to Bellevue, the house where he had this dream. ‘Do you sup-
pose,’ he writes, ‘that some day a marble tablet will be placed on the house,inscribed with these words?—
At the moment there seems little prospect of it.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 1459780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 146CHAPTER III
A DREAM IS THE FULFILMENT OF A WISH
When , after passing through a narrow deﬁle, we suddenly emerge upon
a piece of high ground, where the path divides and the ﬁnest prospects
open up on every side, we may pause for a moment and consider inwhich direction we shall ﬁrst turn our steps.
1Such is the case with us,
now that we have surmounted the ﬁrst interpretation of a dream. We ﬁndourselves in the full daylight of a sudden discovery. Dreams are not to belikened to the unregulated sounds that rise from a musical instrumentstruck by the blow of some external force instead of by a player’s hand[cf. p. 104 f.]; they are not meaningless, they are not absurd; they do notimply that one portion of our store of ideas is asleep while another por-tion is beginning to wake. On the contrary, they are psychical phenomenaof complete validity—fulﬁlments of wishes; they can be inserted into thechain of intelligible waking mental acts; they are constructed by a highlycomplicated activity of the mind.
But no sooner have we begun to rejoice at this discovery than we are
assailed by a ﬂood of questions. If, as we are told by dream-interpretation,
1471 [In a letter to Fliess of August 6, 1899 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 114), Freud de-
scribes the opening chapters of this book as follows: ‘The whole thing is planned
on the model of an imaginary walk. First comes the dark wood of the authorities(who cannot see the trees), where there is no clear view and it is easy to go astray.Then there is a cavernous deﬁle through which I lead my readers—my specimendream with its peculiarities, its details, its indiscretions and its bad jokes—andthen, all at once, the high ground and the open prospect and the question:“Which way do you want to go?”’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 147a dream represents a fulﬁlled wish, what is the origin of the remarkable
and puzzling form in which the wish-fulﬁlment is expressed? What alter-ation have the dream-thoughts undergone before being changed into themanifest dream which we remember when we wake up? How does thatalteration take place? What is the source of the material that has beenmodiﬁed into the dream? What is the source of the many peculiaritiesthat are to be observed in the dream-thoughts—such, for instance, as thefact that they may be mutually contradictory? (Cf. the analogy of the bor-rowed kettle on pp. 143 f.) Can a dream tell us anything new about ourinternal psychical processes? Can its content correct opinions we haveheld during the day?
I propose that for the moment we should leave all these questions on
one side and pursue our way further along one particular path. We havelearnt that a dream can represent a wish as fulﬁlled. Our ﬁrst concernmust be to enquire whether this is a universal characteristic of dreams orwhether it merely happened to be the content of the particular dream(the dream of Irma’s injection) which was the ﬁrst that we analysed. Foreven if we are prepared to ﬁnd that every dream has a meaning and a psy-chical value, the possibility must remain open of this meaning not beingthe same in every dream. Our ﬁrst dream was the fulﬁlment of a wish; asecond one might turn out to be a fulﬁlled fear; the content of a thirdmight be a reﬂection; while a fourth might merely reproduce a memory.Shall we ﬁnd other wishful dreams besides this one? or are there perhapsno dreams but wishful ones?
It is easy to prove that dreams often reveal themselves without any dis-
guise as fulﬁlments of wishes; so that it may seem surprising that the lan-guage of dreams was not understood long ago. For instance, there is adream that I can produce in myself as often as I like—experimentally, as itwere. If I eat anchovies or olives or any other highly salted food in theevening, I develop thirst during the night which wakes me up. But my wak-ing is preceded by a dream; and this always has the same content, namely,that I am drinking. I dream I am swallowing down water in great gulps,and it has the delicious taste that nothing can equal but a cool drink whenone is parched with thirst. Then I wake up and have to have a real drink.This simple dream is occasioned by the thirst which I become aware ofwhen I wake. The thirst gives rise to a wish to drink, and the dream showsme that wish fulﬁlled. In doing so it is performing a function—which itwas easy to divine. I am a good sleeper and not accustomed to be woken by148 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 148any physical need. If I can succeed in appeasing my thirst by dreaming that
I am drinking, then I need not wake up in order to quench it. This, then,
is a dream of convenience. Dreaming has taken the place of action, as it of-ten does elsewhere in life. Unluckily my need for water to quench my thirstcannot be satisﬁed by a dream in the same way as my thirst for revengeagainst my friend Otto and Dr. M.; but the good intention is there in bothcases. Not long ago this same dream of mine showed some modiﬁcation. Ihad felt thirsty even before I fell asleep, and I had emptied a glass of waterthat stood on the table beside my bed. A few hours later during the night Ihad a fresh attack of thirst, and this had inconvenient results. In order toprovide myself with some water I should have had to get up and fetch theglass standing on the table by my wife’s bed. I therefore had an appropriatedream that my wife was giving me a drink out of a vase; this vase was anEtruscan cinerary urn which I had brought back from a journey to Italy andhad since given away. But the water in it tasted so salty (evidently becauseof the ashes in the urn) that I woke up. It will be noticed how convenientlyeverything was arranged in this dream. Since its only purpose was to fulﬁl awish, it could be completely egoistical. A love of comfort and convenienceis not really compatible with consideration for other people. The introduc-tion of the cinerary urn was probably yet another wish-fulﬁlment. I wassorry that the vase was no longer in my possession—just as the glass of wa-ter on my wife’s table was out of my reach. The urn with its ashes ﬁtted in,too, with the salty taste in my mouth which had now grown stronger andwhich I knew was bound to wake me.
1149 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments
1 Weygandt (1893, 41) was aware of the occurrence of thirst dreams, for he writes:
‘The sensation of thirst is perceived with greater precision than any other; it al-
ways gives rise to an idea of its being quenched. The manner in which the thirstis represented as being quenched in the dream varies, and derives its special formfrom some near-by memory. Another general feature in these cases is that imme-diately after the idea of the thirst being quenched there follows a disappointmentover the small effect produced by the imaginary refreshment.’ Weygandt, how-ever, overlooks the fact that this reaction of a dream to a stimulus is one whichholds good universally. Other people who are attacked by thirst in the night maywake up without having had a dream; but that is no objection to my experi-ment. It merely shows that they are worse sleepers than I am.—[Added 1914:]
Compare in this connection Isaiah xxix, 8: ‘It shall even be as when an hungryman dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty:or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh,and, behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite.’9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 149Dreams of convenience like these were very frequent in my youth.
Having made it a practice as far back as I can remember to work late into
the night, I always found it difﬁcult to wake early. I used then to have adream of being out of bed and standing by the washing-stand; after awhile I was no longer able to disguise from myself the fact that I wasreally still in bed, but in the meantime I had had a little more sleep. Aslothful dream of this kind, which was expressed in a particularly amusingand elegant form, has been reported to me by a young medical colleaguewho seems to share my liking for sleep. The landlady of his lodgings inthe neighbourhood of the hospital had strict instructions to wake himin time every morning but found it no easy job to carry them out. Onemorning sleep seemed peculiarly sweet. The landlady called through thedoor: ‘Wake up, Herr Pepi! It’s time to go to the hospital!’ In response tothis he had a dream that he was lying in bed in a room in the hospital,and that there was a card over the bed on which was written: ‘Pepi H.,medical student, age 22.’ While he was dreaming, he said to himself, ‘AsI’m already in the hospital, there’s no need for me to go there’—and
turned over and went on sleeping. In this way he openly confessed themotive for his dream.
1
Here is another dream in which once again the stimulus produced its
effect during actual sleep. One of my women patients, who had beenobliged to undergo an operation on her jaw which had taken an un-favourable course, was ordered by her doctors to wear a cooling apparatuson the side of her face day and night. But as soon as she fell asleep sheused to throw it off. One day, after she had once more thrown the appa-ratus on the ﬂoor, I was asked to speak to her seriously about it. ‘Thistime I really couldn’t help it,’ she answered. ‘It was because of a dream Ihad in the night. I dreamt I was in a box at the opera and very much en-joying the performance. But Herr Karl Meyer was in the nursing-homeand complaining bitterly of pains in his jaw. So I told myself that as Ihadn’t any pain I didn’t need the apparatus; and I threw it away.’ Thedream of this poor sufferer seems almost like a concrete representation ofa phrase that sometimes forces its way on to people’s lips in unpleasantsituations: ‘I must say I could think of something more agreeable thanthis.’ The dream gives a picture of this more agreeable thing. The Herr150 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments
3 [This dream was reported by Freud in a letter to Fliess, dated March 4, 1895
(Freud, 1950a , Letter 22)—the earliest recorded hint at the wish-fulﬁlment
theory.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 150Karl Meyer on to whom the dreamer transplanted her pains was the most
indifferent young man of her acquaintance that she could call to mind.
The wish-fulﬁlment can be detected equally easily in some other
dreams which I have collected from normal people. A friend of mine,who knows my theory of dreams and has told his wife of it, said to meone day: ‘My wife has asked me to tell you that she had a dream yesterdaythat she was having her period. You can guess what that means.’ I couldindeed guess it. The fact that this young married woman dreamt that shewas having her period meant that she had missed her period. I could wellbelieve that she would have been glad to go on enjoying her freedom a lit-tle longer before shouldering the burden of motherhood. It was a neatway of announcing her ﬁrst pregnancy. Another friend of mine wrote andtold me that, not long before, his wife had dreamt that she had noticedsome milk stains on the front of her vest. This too was an announcementof pregnancy, but not of a ﬁrst one. The young mother was wishing thatshe might have more nourishment to give her second child than she hadhad for her ﬁrst.
A young woman had been cut off from society for weeks on end while
she nursed her child through an infectious illness. After the child’s recov-ery, she had a dream of being at a party at which, among others, she metAlphonse Daudet, Paul Bourget, and Marcel Prévost; they were all mostaffable to her and highly amusing. All of the authors resembled their por-traits, except Marcel Prévost, of whom she had never seen a picture; andhe looked like . . . the disinfection ofﬁcer who had fumigated the sick-room the day before and who had been her ﬁrst visitor for so long. Thusit seems possible to give a complete translation of the dream: ‘It’s abouttime for something more amusing than this perpetual sick-nursing.’
These examples will perhaps be enough to show that dreams which can
only be understood as fulﬁlments of wishes and which bear their meaningupon their faces without disguise are to be found under the most frequentand various conditions. They are mostly short and simple dreams, whichafford a pleasant contrast to the confused and exuberant compositions thathave in the main attracted the attention of the authorities. Nevertheless, itwill repay us to pause for a moment over these simple dreams. We may ex-pect to ﬁnd the very simplest forms of dreams in children , since there can
be no doubt that their psychical productions are less complicated thanthose of adults. Child psychology, in my opinion, is destined to performthe same useful services for adult psychology that the investigation of thestructure or development of the lower animals has performed for research151 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 151into the structure of the higher classes of animals. Few deliberate efforts
have hitherto been made to make use of child psychology for this purpose.
The dreams of young children are frequently1pure wish-fulﬁlments
and are in that case2quite uninteresting compared with the dreams of
adults. They raise no problems for solution; but on the other hand theyare of inestimable importance in proving that, in their essential nature,dreams represent fulﬁlments of wishes. I have been able to collect a fewinstances of such dreams from material provided by my own children.
I have to thank an excursion which we made to the lovely village of
Hallstatt
3in the summer of 1896 for two dreams: one of these was dreamt
by my daughter, who was then eight and a half, and the other by herbrother of ﬁve and a quarter. I must explain by way of preamble that wehad been spending the summer on a hillside near Aussee, from which, inﬁne weather, we enjoyed a splendid view of the Dachstein. The SimonyHütte could be clearly distinguished through a telescope. The childrenmade repeated attempts at seeing it through the telescope—I cannot saywith what success. Before our excursion I had told the children that Hall-statt lay at the foot of the Dachstein. They very much looked forward tothe day. From Hallstatt we walked up the Echerntal, which delighted thechildren with its succession of changing landscapes. One of them, however,the ﬁve-year-old boy, gradually became fretful. Each time a new mountaincame into view he asked if that was the Dachstein and I had to say, ‘No,only one of the foothills.’ After he had asked the question several times, hefell completely silent; and he refused point-blank to come with us up thesteep path to the waterfall. I thought he was tired. But next morning hecame to me with a radiant face and said: ‘Last night I dreamt we were atthe Simony Hütte.’ I understood him then. When I had spoken about theDachstein, he had expected to climb the mountain in the course of our ex-152 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments
1 [This word was added in 1911. The following comment upon this qualifying
adverb appears in Gesammelte Schriften , 3(1925), 21: ‘Experience has shown
that distorted dreams, which stand in need of interpretation, are already found
in children of four or ﬁve; and this is in full agreement with our theoretical viewson the determining conditions of distortion in dreams.’]
2 [Before 1911: ‘for that reason.’]
3 [In the Salzkammergut district of Upper Austria.—‘Echerntal’ (below) is mis-
printed ‘Escherntal’ in all the German editions.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 152cursion to Hallstatt and to ﬁnd himself at close quarters with the hut
which there had been so much talk about in connection with the telescope.But when he found that he was being fobbed off with foothills and a wa-terfall, he felt disappointed and out of spirits. The dream was a compensa-tion. I tried to discover its details, but they were scanty: ‘You have to climbup steps for six hours’—which was what he had been told.
The same excursion stirred up wishes in the eight-and-a-half-year-old
girl as well—wishes which had to be satisﬁed in a dream. We had takenour neighbour’s twelve-year-old son with us to Hallstatt. He was alreadya full-blown gallant, and there were signs that he had engaged the younglady’s affections. Next morning she told me the following dream: ‘Justfancy! I had a dream that Emil was one of the family and called you “Fa-ther” and “Mother” and slept with us in the big room like the boys. ThenMother came in and threw a handful of big bars of chocolate, wrappedup in blue and green paper, under our beds.’ Her brothers, who have ev-idently not inherited a faculty for understanding dreams, followed thelead of the authorities and declared that the dream was nonsense. The girlherself defended one part of the dream at least; and it throws light on thetheory of the neuroses to learn which part. ‘Of course it’s nonsense Emil
being one of the family; but the part about the bars of chocolate isn’t.’ Ithad been precisely on that point that I had been in the dark, but the girl’smother now gave me the explanation. On their way home from the sta-tion the children had stopped in front of a slot-machine from which theywere accustomed to obtain bars of chocolate of that very kind, wrappedin shiny metallic paper. They had wanted to get some; but their motherrightly decided that the day had already fulﬁlled enough wishes and leftthis one over to be fulﬁlled by the dream. I myself had not observed theincident. But the part of the dream which had been proscribed by mydaughter was immediately clear to me. I myself had heard our well- behaved guest telling the children on the walk to wait till Father andMother caught up with them. The little girl’s dream turned this tempo-rary kinship into permanent adoption. Her affection was not yet able topicture any other forms of companionship than those which were repre-sented in the dream and which were based on her relation to her brothers.It was of course impossible to discover without questioning her why thebars of chocolate were thrown under the beds.
A friend of mine has reported a dream to me which was very much
like my son’s. The dreamer was an eight-year-old girl. Her father had153 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 153started off with several children on a walk to Dornbach,1with the idea of
visiting the Rohrer Hütte. As it was getting late, however, he had turned
back, promising the children to make up for the disappointment anothertime. On their way home they had passed the signpost that marks thepath up to the Hameau. The children had then asked to be taken up tothe Hameau; but once again for the same reason they had to be consoledwith the promise of another day. Next morning the eight-year-old girlcame to her father and said in satisﬁed tones: ‘Daddy, I dreamt last nightthat you went with us to the Rohrer Hütte and the Hameau.’ In her im-patience she had anticipated the fulﬁlment of her father’s promises.
Here is an equally straightforward dream, provoked by the beauty of the
scenery at Aussee in another of my daughters, who was at that time threeand a quarter. She had crossed the lake for the ﬁrst time, and the crossinghad been too short for her: when we reached the landing-stage she had notwanted to leave the boat and had wept bitterly. Next morning she said:‘Last night I went on the lake.’ Let us hope that her dream- crossing hadbeen of a more satisfying length.
My eldest boy, then eight years old, already had dreams of his phan-
tasies coming true: he dreamt that he was driving in a chariot withAchilles and that Diomede was the charioteer. As may be guessed, he hadbeen excited the day before by a book on the legends of Greece which hadbeen given to his elder sister.
If I may include words spoken by children in their sleep under the
heading of dreams, I can at this point quote one of the most youthfuldreams in my whole collection. My youngest daughter, then nineteenmonths old, had had an attack of vomiting one morning and had conse-quently been kept without food all day. During the night after this day ofstarvation she was heard calling out excitedly in her sleep: ‘Anna Fweud,stwawbewwies, wild stwaw-bewwies, omblet, pudden!’ At that time shewas in the habit of using her own name to express the idea of takingposession of something. The menu included pretty well everything thatmust have seemed to her to make up a desirable meal. The fact thatstrawberries appeared in it in two varieties was a demonstration againstthe domestic health regulations. It was based upon the circumstance,which she had no doubt observed, that her nurse had attributed her in-154 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments
1 [In the hills just outside Vienna.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 154disposition to a surfeit of strawberries. She was thus retaliating in her
dream against this unwelcome verdict.1
Though we think highly of the happiness of childhood because it is
still innocent of sexual desires, we should not forget what a fruitful sourceof disappointment and renunciation, and consequently what a stimulusto dreaming, may be provided by the other of the two great vital in-stincts.
2Here is another instance of this. My nephew, aged 22 months,
had been entrusted with the duty of congratulating me on my birthdayand of presenting me with a basket of cherries, which are still scarcely inseason at that time of year. He seems to have found the task a hard one,for he kept on repeating ‘Chewwies in it’ but could not be induced tohand the present over. However, he found a means of compensation. Hehad been in the habit every morning of telling his mother that he had adream of the ‘white soldier’—a Guards ofﬁcer in his white cloak whomhe had once gazed at admiringly in the street. On the day after his birth-day sacriﬁce he awoke with a cheerful piece of news, which could onlyhave originated from a dream: ‘Hermann eaten all the chewwies!’
3
I do not myself know what animals dream of. But a proverb, to which
my attention was drawn by one of my students, does claim to know.155 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments
1 The same feat was accomplished shortly afterwards by a dream produced by this
little girl’s grandmother—their combined ages came to some seventy years. She
had been obliged to go without food for a whole day on account of a disturbancedue to a ﬂoating kidney. During the following night, no doubt imagining herselfback in the heyday of her girlhood, she dreamt that she had been ‘asked out’ toboth of the principal meals and been served at both with the most appetizing delicacies.—[The little girl’s dream had been reported to Fliess not long after itsoccurrence (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 73 of October 31, 1897).]
2 [Footnote added 1911:] A closer study of the mental life of children has taught us,
to be sure, that sexual instinctual forces, in infantile form, play a large enough part,and one that has been too long overlooked, in the psychical activity of children.Closer study, too, has given us grounds for feeling some doubt in regard to the hap-piness of childhood as it has been constructed by adults in retrospect. Cf. my Three
Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).—[The remarkable inconsistency between
this sentence in the text and several other passages (e.g. on pp. 273 ff. below) is com-mented on in the editor’s preface to the last- mentioned work in the seventh volumeof the Standard Edition.]
3 [Footnote added 1911:] The fact should be mentioned that children soon begin to
have more complicated and less transparent dreams, and that, on the other hand,adults in certain circumstances often have dreams of a similarly simple, infantile9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 155156 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments
character. The wealth of unexpected material that may occur in the dreams of chil-
dren of four or ﬁve is shown by examples in my ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’ (1909 b) and in Jung (1910 a).—[Added 1914:] For analytical
interpretations of children’s dreams see also von Hug-Hellmuth (1911 and 1913),Putnam (1912), van Raalte (1912), Spielrein (1913) and Tausk (1913). Children’sdreams are also reported by Bianchieri (1912), Busemann (1909 and 1910),Doglia and Bianchieri (1910–11) and, in particular, Wiggam (1909), who laysstress on their trend towards wish-fulﬁlment.—[Added 1911:] On the other hand,
dreams of an infantile type seem to occur in adults with special frequency whenthey ﬁnd themselves in unusual external circumstances. Thus Otto Nordenskjöld(1904, 1,336 f.) writes as follows of the members of his expedition while they were
wintering in the Antarctic: ‘The direction taken by our innermost thoughts wasvery clearly shown by our dreams, which were never more vivid or numerous thanat this time. Even those of us who otherwise dreamt but rarely had long stories totell in the morning when we exchanged our latest experiences in this world of theimagination. They were all concerned with the outside world which was now soremote from us, though they were often adapted to our actual circumstances. Oneof my companions had a particularly characteristic dream of being back in hisschool class-room, where it was his task to skin miniature seals which had been spe-cially prepared for instructional purposes. Eating and drinking, however, were thepivot round which our dreams most often revolved. One of us, who had a specialgift for attending large luncheon parties during the night, was proud if he was ableto report in the morning that he had “got through a three-course dinner.” Anotherof us dreamt of tobacco, of whole mountains of tobacco; while a third dreamt of aship in full sail coming in across open water. Yet another dream is worth repeating.The postman brought round the mail and gave a long explanation of why we hadhad to wait so long for it: he had delivered it at the wrong address and had onlysucceeded in recovering it with great difﬁculty. We dreamt, of course, of still moreimpossible things. But there was a most striking lack of imaginativeness shown byalmost all the dreams that I dreamt myself or heard described. It would certainlybe of great psychological interest if all these dreams could be recorded. And it willeasily be understood how much we longed for sleep, since it could offer each oneof us everything that he most eagerly desired.’ [This passage is much abbreviatedin the English translation of Nordenskjöld’s book (1905, 290).]—[ Added 1914:]
According to Du Prel (1885, 231), ‘Mungo Park, when he was almost dying ofthirst on one of his African journeys, dreamt unceasingly of the well-watered valleysand meadows of his home. Similarly, Baron T renck, suffering torments of hungerwhile he was a prisoner in the fortress at Magdeburg, dreamt of being surroundedby sumptuous meals; and George Back, who took part in Franklin’s ﬁrst expedi-tion, when he was almost dying of starvation as a result of his fearful privations,dreamt constantly and regularly of copious meals.’9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 156‘What,’ asks the proverb, ‘do geese dream of?’ And it replies: ‘Of maize.’1
The whole theory that dreams are wish-fulﬁlments is contained in these
two phrases.2
It will be seen that we might have arrived at our theory of the hidden
meaning of dreams most rapidly merely by following linguistic usage. Itis true that common language sometimes speaks of dreams with con-tempt. (The phrase ‘ Träume sind Schäume [Dreams are froth]’ seems in-
tended to support the scientiﬁc estimate of dreams.) But, on the whole,ordinary usage treats dreams above all as the blessed fulﬁllers of wishes. Ifever we ﬁnd our expectation surpassed by the event, we exclaim in our de-light: ‘I should never have imagined such a thing even in my wildestdreams.’
3157 III. Dreams as Wish-Fulfilments
1 [Footnote added 1911:] A Hungarian proverb quoted by Ferenczi [1910] goes
further and declares that ‘pigs dream of acorns and geese dream of maize.’—
[Added 1914:] A Jewish proverb runs: ‘What do hens dream of?—Of millet.’
(Bernstein and Segel, 1908, 116.)
2 [Footnote added 1914:] I am far from seeking to maintain that I am the ﬁrst
writer to have had the idea of deriving dreams from wishes. (Cf. the openingsentences of my next chapter.) Those who attach any importance to anticipa-tions of this kind may go back to classical antiquity and quote Herophilus, aphysician who lived under the ﬁrst Ptolemy. According to Büchsenschütz (1868,33), he distinguished three sorts of dreams: those which are sent by the gods,those which are natural and arise when the mind forms a picture of somethingthat is agreeable to it and will come about, and those which are of a mixed na-ture and which arise of their own accord from the emergence of pictures inwhich we see what we wish for. J. Stärcke (1913, [248]) has drawn attention toa dream in Scherner’s collection which that writer himself describes as the fulﬁl-ment of a wish. Scherner (1861, 239) writes: ‘The dreamer’s imagination ful-ﬁlled her waking wish so promptly, simply because that wish was emotionallyactive in her.’ Scherner classes this dream among ‘dreams of mood’; alongside ithe places ‘dreams of erotic yearning’ in men and women, and ‘dreams of ill- temper.’ There is clearly no question of Scherner attributing any more impor-tance to wishes in the instigation of dreams than to any other waking mentalstate: still less is there any question of his having related wishes to the essentialnature of dreaming.
3 [Children’s dreams (including many of those recorded in this chapter) and
dreams of an infantile type are discussed in Lecture VIII of Freud’s Introductory
Lectures (1916–17) and more brieﬂy in Section III of his short study On Dreams
(1901a) (Standard Ed., 5, 643 f.).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 1579780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 158CHAPTER IV
DISTORTION IN DREAMS
IfI proceed to put forward the assertion that the meaning of every dream
is the fulﬁlment of a wish, that is to say that there cannot be any dreams
but wishful dreams, I feel certain in advance that I shall meet with themost categorical contradiction.
‘There is nothing new,’ I shall be told, ‘in the idea that some dreams are
to be regarded as wish-fulﬁlments; the authorities noticed that fact longago. Cf. Radestock (1879, 137 f.), Volkelt (1875, 110 f.), Purkinje (1846,456), Tissié (1890, 70), Simon (1888, 42, on the hunger dreams of BaronT renck while he was a prisoner), and a passage in Griesinger (1845, 89).
1
But to assert that there are no dreams other than wish-fulﬁlment dreams isonly one more unjustiﬁable generalization, though fortunately one whichit is easy to disprove. After all, plenty of dreams occur which contain themost distressing subject-matter but never a sign of any wish-fulﬁlment. Ed-uard von Hartmann, the philosopher of pessimism, is probably furthest re-moved from the wish-fulﬁlment theory. In his Philosophie des Unbewussten
(1890, 2,344) he writes: “When it comes to dreams, we ﬁnd all the annoy-
ances of waking life carried over into the state of sleep; the only thing wedo notﬁnd is what can to some extent reconcile an educated man to life—
scientiﬁc and artistic enjoyment. . . .” But even less disgruntled observers
1591[Footnote added 1914:] A writer as early as Plotinus, the Neo-platonist, is quoted
by Du Prel (1885, 276) as saying: ‘When our desires are aroused, imagination
comes along and, as it were, presents us with the objects of those desires.’ [ En-
nead, iv, 4, 17.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 159have insisted that pain and un-pleasure are more common in dreams than
pleasure: for instance, Scholz (1893, 57), Volkelt (1875, 80), and others.Indeed two ladies, Florence Hallam and Sarah Weed (1896, 499), have ac-tually given statistical expression, based on a study of their own dreams, tothe preponderance of unpleasure in dreaming. They ﬁnd that 57.2 per centof dreams are “disagreeable” and only 28.6 per cent positively “pleasant.”And apart from these dreams, which carry over into sleep the various dis-tressing emotions of life, there are anxiety-dreams, in which that mostdreadful of all unpleasurable feelings holds us in its grasp till we awaken.And the commonest victims of these anxiety-dreams are precisely children,
1
whose dreams you have described as undisguised wish-fulﬁlments.’
It does in fact look as though anxiety-dreams make it impossible to as-
sert as a general proposition (based on the examples quoted in my lastchapter) that dreams are wish-fulﬁlments; indeed they seem to stamp anysuch proposition as an absurdity.
Nevertheless, there is no great difﬁculty in meeting these apparently
conclusive objections. It is only necessary to take notice of the fact that mytheory is not based on a consideration of the manifest content of dreamsbut refers to the thoughts which are shown by the work of interpretation tolie behind dreams. We must make a contrast between the manifest and the
latent content of dreams. There is no question that there are dreams whose
manifest content is of the most distressing kind. But has anyone tried to in-terpret such dreams? to reveal the latent thoughts behind them? If not, thenthe two objections raised against my theory will not hold water: it still re-mains possible that distressing dreams and anxiety-dreams, when they havebeen interpreted, may turn out to be fulﬁlments of wishes.
2
When in the course of a piece of scientiﬁc work we come upon a prob-
lem which is difﬁcult to solve, it is often a good plan to take up a secondproblem along with the original one—just as it is easier to crack two nuts160 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 Cf. Debacker (1881) on pavor nocturnus.
2 [Footnote added 1909:] It is hard to credit the obstinacy with which readers and
critics of this book shut their eyes to this consideration and overlook the funda-
mental distinction between the manifest and latent content of dreams.—[ Added
1914:] On the other hand, nothing in the literature of the subject comes so nearto my hypothesis as a passage in James Sully’s essay ‘The Dream as a Revelation’(1893, 364). The fact that I am only now quoting it for the ﬁrst time is no signof disparagement: ‘It would seem then, after all, that dreams are not the utternonsense they have been said to be by such authorities as Chaucer, Shakespeare9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 160together than each separately. Thus we are not only faced by the question
‘How can distressing dreams and anxiety-dreams be wish-fulﬁlments?’;our reﬂections enable us to add a second question: ‘Why is it that dreamswith an indifferent content, which turn out to be wish-fulﬁlments, do notexpress their meaning undisguised?’ Take, for instance, the dream whichI treated at such length of Irma’s injection. It was not by any means of adistressing nature and interpretation showed it as a striking example ofthe fulﬁlment of a wish. But why should it have needed any interpreta-tion at all? Why did it not say what it meant straight out? At ﬁrst sightthe dream of Irma’s injection gave no impression that it represented awish of the dreamer’s as fulﬁlled. My readers will have had no such im-pression; but neither did I myself before I carried out the analysis. Let usdescribe this behaviour of dreams, which stands in so much need of ex-planation, as ‘the phenomenon of distortion in dreams.’ Thus our secondproblem is: what is the origin of dream-distortion?
A number of possible solutions of the problem may at once occur to
us: as, for instance, that some incapacity exists during sleep for giving di-rect expression to our dream-thoughts. But the analysis of certain dreamsforces us to adopt another explanation of distortion in dreams. I will ex-emplify this by another dream of my own. Once again this will involveme in a variety of indiscretions; but a thorough elucidation of the prob-lem will compensate for my personal sacriﬁce.
Preamble.—In the spring of 1897 I learnt that two professors at our
university had recommended me for appointment as professor extraor -
dinarius .
1The news surprised and greatly delighted me, since it implied161 IV. Distortion in Dreams
and Milton. The chaotic aggregations of our night-fancy have a signiﬁcance and
communicate new knowledge. Like some letter in cypher, the dream-inscriptionwhen scrutinized closely loses its ﬁrst look of balderdash and takes on the aspectof a serious, intelligible message. Or, to vary the ﬁgure slightly, we may say that,like some palimpsest, the dream discloses beneath its worthless surface- characterstraces of an old and precious communication.’ [Freud prints the two last sen-tences in spaced type.]
1 [Roughly equivalent to an Assistant Professor. All such appointments in Austria
were made by the Minister of Education. The fact of this recommendation is re-ported by Freud in a letter to Fliess of February 8, 1897 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter
58) and the dream itself is mentioned on March 15, 1897 (ibid., Letter 85).—The ‘denominational considerations’ mentioned below relate, of course, to anti-Semitic feeling, which was already rife in Vienna during the last years of thenineteenth century.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 161recognition by two eminent men, which could not be put down to any
considerations of a personal kind. But I at once warned myself not to at-tach any expectations to the event. During the last few years the Ministryhad disregarded recommendations of that sort; and several of my col-leagues who were my seniors in age and at least my equals in merit hadbeen waiting vainly for appointment. I had no reason to believe that Ishould be more fortunate. I therefore determined to meet the future withresignation. So far as I knew, I was not an ambitious man; I was followingmy profession with gratifying success even without the advantages af-forded by a title. Moreover there was no question of my pronouncing thegrapes sweet or sour: they hung far too high over my head.
One evening I had a visit from a friend—one of the men whose exam-
ple I had taken as a warning to me. For a considerable time he had beena candidate for promotion to a professorship, a rank which in our societyturns its holder into a demi-god to his patients. Less resigned than I was,however, he was in the habit of paying his respects from time to time inthe ofﬁces of the Ministry with a view to advancing his prospects. He hadbeen paying one of these visits just before calling on me. He told me thaton this occasion he had driven the exalted ofﬁcial into a corner and hadasked straight out whether the delay over his appointment was not in factdue to denominational considerations. The reply had been that, in viewof the present state of feeling, it was no doubt true that, for the moment,His Excellency was not in a position, etc., etc. ‘At least I know where Iam now,’ my friend had concluded. It was not news to me, though it wasbound to strengthen my feeling of resignation; for the same denomina-tional considerations applied to my own case.
On the morning after this visit I had the following dream, which
was remarkable among other things for its form. It consisted of twothoughts and two pictures—each thought being succeeded by a picture.I shall, however, report only the ﬁrst half of the dream here, since theother half has no connection with the purpose for which I am describingthe dream.
I.. . . My friend R. was my uncle.—I had a great feeling of
affection for him.
II. I saw before me his face, somewhat changed. It was as
though it had been drawn out lengthways. A yellow beard thatsurrounded it stood out especially clearly.162 IV. Distortion in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 162Then followed the two other pieces which I shall pass over—once
more a thought followed by a picture.
The interpretation of the dream took place as follows.
When, during the course of the morning, the dream came into my
head, I laughed aloud and said: ‘The dream’s nonsense!’ But it refused togo away and followed me about all day, till at last in the evening I beganto reproach myself: ‘If one of your patients who was interpreting a dreamcould ﬁnd nothing better to say than that it was nonsense, you wouldtake him up about it and suspect that the dream had some disagreeablestory at the back of it which he wanted to avoid becoming aware of. T reatyourself in the same way. Your opinion that the dream is nonsense onlymeans that you have an internal resistance against interpreting it. Don’tlet yourself be put off like this.’ So I set about the interpretation.
‘R. was my uncle.’ What could that mean? I never had more than one
uncle—Uncle Josef.
1There was an unhappy story attached to him.
Once—more than thirty years ago—in his eagerness to make money, heallowed himself to be involved in a transaction of a kind that is severelypunished by the law, and he was in fact punished for it. My father, whosehair turned grey from grief in a few days, used always to say that UncleJosef was not a bad man but only a simpleton; those were his words. Sothat if my friend R. was my Uncle Josef, what I was meaning to say wasthat R. was a simpleton. Hardly credible and most disagreeable!—Butthere was the face which I saw in the dream with its elongated featuresand yellow beard. My uncle did in fact have a face like that, elongatedand framed in a handsome fair beard. My friend R. had originally beenextremely dark; but when black-haired people begin to turn grey theypay for the splendour of their youth. Hair by hair, their black beardsgo through an unpleasing change of colour: ﬁrst they turn to a reddishbrown, then to a yellowish brown, and only then to a deﬁnite grey. Myfriend R.’s beard was at that time passing through this stage—and so, in-cidentally, was my own, as I had noticed with dissatisfaction. The face163 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 It is astonishing to observe the way in which my memory—my waking memory—
was narrowed at this point, for the purposes of the analysis. Actually I have known
ﬁve of my uncles, and loved and honoured one of them. But at the moment atwhich I overcame my resistance to interpreting the dream I said to myself that Inever had more than one uncle—the one that was intended in the dream.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 163that I saw in the dream was at once my friend R.’s and my uncle’s. It was
like one of Galton’s composite photographs. (In order to bring out familylikenesses, Galton used to photograph several faces on the same plate[1907, 6 ff. and 221 ff.].) So there could be no doubt that I really didmean that my friend R. was a simpleton—like my Uncle Josef.
I still had no idea at all what could be the purpose of this comparison,
against which I continued to struggle. It did not go very deep, after all,since my uncle was a criminal, whereas my friend R. bore an unblemishedcharacter . . . except for having been ﬁned for knocking a boy down withhis bicycle. Could I have had that crime in mind? That would have beenmaking fun of the comparison. At this point I remembered another con-versation which I had had a few days earlier with another colleague, N.,and, now I came to think of it, upon the same subject. I had met N. inthe street. He too had been recommended for a professorship. He hadheard of the honour that had been paid me and had offered me his con-gratulations on it; but I had unhesitatingly refused to accept them. ‘Youare the last person,’ I had said, ‘to make that kind of joke; you know whatsuch a recommendation is worth from your own experience.’ ‘Who cansay?’ he had answered—jokingly, it seemed; ‘there was something deﬁniteagainst me.Don’t you know that a woman once started legal proceedings
against me? I needn’t assure you that the case was dismissed. It was a dis-graceful attempt at blackmail; and I had the greatest difﬁculty in savingthe prosecutrix from being punished. But perhaps they may be using thisat the Ministry as an excuse for not appointing me. But youhave an un-
blemished character.’ This told me who the criminal was, and at the sametime showed me how the dream was to be interpreted and what its pur-pose was. My Uncle Josef represented my two colleagues who had notbeen appointed to professorships—the one as a simpleton and the otheras a criminal. I now saw too why they were represented in this light. If theappointment of my friends R. and N. had been postponed for ‘denomi-national’ reasons, my own appointment was also open to doubt; if, how-ever, I could attribute the rejection of my two friends to other reasons,which did not apply to me, my hopes would remain untouched. This wasthe procedure adopted by my dream: it made one of them, R., into a sim-pleton and the other, N., into a criminal, whereas I was neither the one
nor the other; thus we no longer had anything in common; I could re-joice at my appointment to a professorship, and I could avoid drawingthe distressing conclusion that R.’s report of what the high ofﬁcial hadsaid to him must apply equally to me.164 IV. Distortion in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 164But I felt obliged to proceed still further with my interpretation of the
dream; I felt I had not yet ﬁnished dealing with it satisfactorily. I was still
uneasy over the light-heartedness with which I had degraded two of my re-spected colleagues in order to keep open my own path to a professorship.My dissatisfaction with my conduct, however, had diminished since I hadcome to realize the worth that was to be attached to expressions in dreams.I was prepared to deny through thick and thin that I really considered thatR. was a simpleton and that I really disbelieved N.’s account of the black-mailing affair. Nor did I believe that Irma was really made dangerously illthrough being injected with Otto’s preparation of propyl. In both thesecases what my dreams had expressed was only my wish that it might be so.
The assertion in which my wish was realized sounded less absurd in the laterdream than in the earlier one; it made cleverer use of the actual facts in itsconstruction, like a well-designed slander of the kind that makes people feelthat ‘there’s something in it.’ For one of the professors in his own facultyhad voted against my friend R., and my friend N. had himself innocentlyprovided me with the material for my aspersions. Nevertheless, I must re-peat, the dream seemed to me to stand in need of further elucidation.
I then recalled that there was still a piece of the dream which the inter-
pretation had not touched. After the idea had occurred to me that R. wasmy uncle, I had had a warm feeling of affection for him in the dream.Where did that feeling belong? I had naturally never had any feeling of affection for my Uncle Josef. I had been fond of my friend R. and had es-teemed him for many years; but if I had gone up to him and expressed mysentiments in terms approaching the degree of affection I had felt in thedream, there could be no doubt that he would have been astonished. Myaffection for him struck me as ungenuine and exaggerated—like the judge-ment of his intellectual qualities which I had expressed by fusing his per-sonality with my uncle’s, though there the exaggeration had been in the
opposite direction. But a new light began to dawn on me. The affection inthe dream did not belong to the latent content, to the thoughts that lay be-hind the dream; it stood in contradiction to them and was calculated toconceal the true interpretation of the dream. And probably that was pre-cisely its raison d’être. I recalled my resistance against embarking on the in-
terpretation, how long I had put it off and how I had declared that thedream was sheer nonsense. My psycho-analytic treatments taught me howa repudiation of that kind was to be interpreted: it had no value as a judge-ment but was simply an expression of emotion. If my little daughter didnot want an apple that was offered to her, she asserted that the apple tasted165 IV. Distortion in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 165sour without having tasted it. And if my patients behaved like the child, I
knew that they were concerned with an idea which they wanted to repress.The same was true of my dream. I did not want to interpret it, because theinterpretation contained something that I was struggling against. When Ihad completed the interpretation I learnt what it was that I had been strug-gling against—namely, the assertion that R. was a simpleton. The affectionthat I felt for R. could not be derived from the latent dream-thoughts; butno doubt it originated from this struggle of mine. If my dream was dis-torted in this respect from its latent  content—and distorted into its oppo-site—then the affection that was manifest in the dream served the purposeof this distortion. In other words, distortion was shown in this case to bedeliberate and to be a means of dissimulation. My dream-thoughts had con-
tained a slander against R.; and, in order that I might not notice this, whatappeared in the dream was the opposite, a feeling of affection for him.
It seemed as though this might be a discovery of general validity. It is
true that, as was shown by the instances quoted in Chapter III, there aresome dreams which are undisguised fulﬁlments of wishes. But in caseswhere the wish-fulﬁlment is unrecognizable, where it has been disguised,there must have existed some inclination to put up a defence against thewish; and owing to this defence the wish was unable to express itself exceptin a distorted shape. I will try to seek a social parallel to this internal eventin the mind. Where can we ﬁnd a similar distortion of a psychical act insocial life? Only where two persons are concerned, one of whom possessesa certain degree of power which the second is obliged to take into account.In such a case the second person will distort his psychical acts or, as wemight put it, will dissimulate. The politeness which I practise every day isto a large extent dissimulation of this kind; and when I interpret mydreams for my readers I am obliged to adopt similar distortions. The poetcomplains of the need for these distortions in the words:
Das Beste, was du wissen kannst,Darfst du den Buben doch nicht sagen.
1166 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 [Mephistopheles, in Goethe’s Faust, Part I [Scene 4]: ‘After all, the best of what
you know may not be told to boys.’—These were favourite lines of Freud’s. He
uses them again on p. 461 below. He had already quoted them in letters to Fliessof December 3, 1897, and February 9, 1898 (Freud, 1950 a, Letters 77 and 83);
and, towards the end of his life, on the occasion of his reception of the Goetheprize in 1930, he applied them to Goethe himself. (Freud, 1930 e.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 166A similar difﬁculty confronts the political writer who has disagreeable
truths to tell to those in authority. If he presents them undisguised, the
authorities will suppress his words—after they have been spoken, if hispronouncement was an oral one, but beforehand, if he had intended tomake it in print. A writer must beware of the censorship,
1and on its ac-
count he must soften and distort the expression of his opinion. Accordingto the strength and sensitiveness of the censorship he ﬁnds himself com-pelled either merely to refrain from certain forms of attack, or to speak inallusions in place of direct references, or he must conceal his objection-able pronouncement beneath some apparently innocent disguise: for in-stance, he may describe a dispute between two Mandarins in the MiddleKingdom, when the people he really has in mind are ofﬁcials in his owncountry. The stricter the censorship, the more far-reaching will be the dis-guise and the more ingenious too may be the means employed for puttingthe reader on the scent of the true meaning.
2167 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 [This analogy, which makes its first appearance in this passage in connection
with dreams, had already been used in connection with paranoia at the end of
Freud’s second paper on the neuropsychoses of defence (1896 b) and more
generally in Section 2 of his chapter on psychotherapy in Studies on Hysteria
(Breuer and Freud, 1895).]
2 [Footnote added 1919:] Frau Dr. H. von Hug-Hellmuh (1915) has recorded a
dream which is perhaps better ﬁtted than any to justify my choice of nomencla-ture. In this example the dream-distortion adopted the same methods as the postalcensorship for expunging passages which were objectionable to it. The postal cen-sorship makes such passages unreadable by blacking them out; the dream censor-ship replaced them by an incomprehensible mumble.
In order to make the dream intelligible, I must explain that the dreamer, a
cultivated and highly esteemed lady, was ﬁfty years of age. She was the widow ofan ofﬁcer of high rank who had died some twelve years previously and was themother of grown sons, one of whom was in the ﬁeld at the time of the dream.
Here then is the dream—which deals with ‘love services’ in wartime. [‘ Liebes-
dienste’ means in the ﬁrst instance ‘services performed for love,’ i.e. ‘unremuner-ated services’; but the term obviously courts another interpretation.] ‘The patientwent to Garrison Hospital No. 1 and informed the sentry at the gate that shemust speak to the Chief Medical Ofﬁcer (mentioning a name that was unknownto her) as she wanted to volunteer for service at the hospital. She pronounced theword “service” in such a way that the N.C.O. at once understood that she meant“love service.” Since she was an elderly lady, after some hesitation he allowed herto pass. Instead of ﬁnding the Chief Medical Ofﬁcer, however, she reached a largeand gloomy apartment in which a number of ofﬁcers and army doctors were9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 167The fact that the phenomena of censorship and of dream-distortion cor-
respond down to their smallest details justiﬁes us in presuming that they are
similarly determined. We may therefore suppose that dreams are given theirshape in individual human beings by the operation of two psychical forces(or we may describe them as currents or systems); and that one of theseforces constructs the wish which is expressed by the dream, while the otherexercises a censorship upon this dream-wish and, by the use of that censor-ship, forcibly brings about a distortion in the expression of the wish. It re-mains to enquire as to the nature of the power enjoyed by this secondagency which enables it to exercise its censorship. When we bear in mindthat the latent dream-thoughts are not conscious before an analysis has168 IV. Distortion in Dreams
standing and sitting round a long table. She approached a staff surgeon with her
request, and he understood her meaning after she had said only a few words. Theactual wording of her speech in the dream was: “I and many other women andgirls in Vienna are ready to . . .” at this point in the dream her words turned intoa mumble “. . . for the troops—ofﬁcers and other ranks without distinction.” Shecould tell from the expressions on the ofﬁcers’ faces, partly embarrassed andpartly sly, that everyone had understood her meaning correctly. The lady wenton: “I’m aware that our decision must sound surprising, but we mean it in bitterearnest. No one asks a soldier in the ﬁeld whether he wishes to die or not.” Therefollowed an awkward silence of some minutes. The staff surgeon then put hisarm round her waist and said: “Suppose, madam, it actually came to . . . (mum-ble).” She drew away from him, thinking to herself: “He’s like all the rest ofthem,” and replied: “Good gracious, I’m an old woman and I might never cometo that. Besides, there’s one condition that must be observed: age must be re-spected. It must never happen that an elderly woman . . . (mumble) . . . a mereboy. That would be terrible.” “I understand perfectly,” replied the staff surgeon.Some of the ofﬁcers, and among them one who had been a suitor of hers in heryouth, laughed out loud. The lady then asked to be taken to the Chief MedicalOfﬁcer, with whom she was acquainted, so that the whole matter could bethrashed out; but she found, to her consternation, that she could not recall hisname. Nevertheless, the staff surgeon, most politely and respectfully, showed herthe way up to the second ﬂoor by a very narrow, iron, spiral staircase, which leddirectly from the room to the upper storeys of the building. As she went up sheheard an ofﬁcer say: “That’s a tremendous decision to make—no matter whethera woman’s young or old! Splendid of her!” Feeling simply that she was doing herduty, she walked up an interminable staircase.—The dream was repeated twicein the course of a few weeks, with, as the lady remarked, some quite unimportantand meaningless modiﬁcations.’
[Some further comments on this dream will be found in Freud’s Introductory
Lectures (1916–17), Lecture IX.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 168been carried out, whereas the manifest content of the dream is consciously
remembered, it seems plausible to suppose that the privilege enjoyed by thesecond agency is that of permitting thoughts to enter consciousness. Noth-ing, it would seem, can reach consciousness from the ﬁrst system withoutpassing the second agency; and the second agency allows nothing to passwithout exercising its rights and making such modiﬁcations as it thinks ﬁtin the thought which is seeking admission to consciousness. Incidentally,this enables us to form a quite deﬁnite view of the ‘essential nature’ of con-sciousness: we see the process of a thing becoming conscious as a speciﬁcpsychical act, distinct from and independent of the process of the formationof a presentation or idea; and we regard consciousness as a sense organwhich perceives data that arise elsewhere. It can be demonstrated that thesebasic assumptions are absolutely indispensable to psychopathology. Wemust, however, postpone our further consideration of them to a later stage.[See Chapter VII, particularly Section F , pp. 605 ff.]
If this picture of the two psychical agencies and their relation to con-
sciousness is accepted, there is a complete analogy in political life to theextraordinary affection which I felt in my dream for my friend R., whowas treated with such contumely during the dream’s interpretation. Let usimagine a society in which a struggle is in process between a ruler who isjealous of his power and an alert public opinion. The people are in revoltagainst an unpopular ofﬁcial and demand his dismissal. But the autocrat,to show that he need take no heed of the popular wish, chooses that mo-ment for bestowing a high distinction upon the ofﬁcial, though there is noother reason for doing so. In just the same way my second agency, whichcommands the approaches to consciousness, distinguished my friend R. bya display of excessive affection simply because the wishful impulses belong-ing to the ﬁrst system, for particular reasons of their own on which theywere intent at the moment, chose to condemn him as a simpleton.
1
These considerations may lead us to feel that the interpretation of
dreams may enable us to draw conclusions as to the structure of our mental169 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 [The analysis of this dream is continued on pp. 213 ff.— Footnote added 1911:]
Hypocritical dreams of this description are not uncommon events in my own
case or in that of other people. [They are further discussed below, pp. 477 ff.]While I was engaged in working out a certain scientiﬁc problem, I was troubledfor several nights in close succession by a somewhat confusing dream which hadas its subject a reconciliation with a friend whom I had dropped many years be-fore. On the fourth or ﬁfth occasion I at last succeeded in understanding the9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 169apparatus which we have hoped for in vain from philosophy. I do not pro-
pose, however, to follow this line of thought [which is taken up in ChapterVII]; but, having cleared up the matter of distortion in dreams, I shall goback to the problem from which we started. The question raised was howdreams with a distressing content can be resolved into wish-fulﬁlments. Wenow see that this is possible if dream-distortion has occurred and if the dis-tressing content serves only to disguise something that is wished for. Bearingin mind our assumption of the existence of two psychical agencies, we canfurther say that distressing dreams do in fact contain something which is dis-tressing to the second agency, but something which at the same time fulﬁls a
wish on the part of the ﬁrstagency. They are wishful dreams in so far as every
dream arises from the ﬁrst agency; the relation of the second agency towardsdreams is of a defensive and not of a creative kind.
1If we were to restrict our-
selves to considering what the second agency contributes to dreams, wecould never arrive at an understanding of them: all the  conundrums whichthe authorities have observed in dreams would remain unsolved.
The fact that dreams really have a secret meaning which represents the
fulﬁlment of a wish must be proved afresh in each particular case byanalysis. I shall therefore select a few dreams with a distressing contentand attempt to analyse them. Some of them are the dreams of hystericalpatients which require lengthy preambles and an occasional excursus intothe psychical processes characteristic of hysteria. But I cannot escape thisaggravation of the difﬁculties of presenting my argument. [See p. 128.]
As I have already explained [pp. 125 f.], when I undertake the analytic
treatment of a psychoneurotic patient his dreams are invariably discussedbetween us. In the course of these discussions I am obliged to give him170 IV. Distortion in Dreams
meaning of the dream. It was an incitement to abandon my last remnants of
consideration for the person in question and to free myself from him completely,and it had been hypocritically disguised as its opposite. [Cf. p. 482.] I have re-ported elsewhere [1910 l, reprinted below, p. 408 n.] a ‘hypocritical Oedipus
dream,’ dreamt by a man, in which the hostile impulses and death-wishes con-tained in the dream-thoughts were replaced by manifest affection. Another kindof hypocritical dream will be mentioned below in Chapter VI [pp. 479 ff.]. [Thefriend referred to in this footnote was evidently Fliess. Cf. Section IV of Kris’sintroduction to Freud’s correspondence with Fliess (Freud, 1950 a).]
1 [Footnote added 1930:] Later [pp. 482 n. and 558 ff.] we shall also come across
instances in which, on the contrary, a dream expresses a wish on the part of thesecond agency.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 170all the psychological explanations which have enabled me myself to reach
an understanding of his symptoms. I am thereupon subjected to a re-morseless criticism, certainly no less severe than I have to expect from themembers of my own profession. And my patients invariably contradictmy assertion that all dreams are fulﬁlments of wishes. Here, then, aresome instances from the material of dreams that have been brought upagainst me as evidence to the contrary.
‘You’re always saying to me,’ began a clever woman patient of mine,
‘that a dream is a fulﬁlled wish. Well, I’ll tell you a dream whose subjectwas the exact opposite—a dream in which one of my wishes was not ful-
ﬁlled. How do you ﬁt that in with your theory? This was the dream:
‘I wanted to give a supper-party, but I had nothing in the house but a little
smoked salmon. I thought I would go out and buy something, but remem-bered then that it was Sunday afternoon and all the shops would be shut.Next I tried to ring up some caterers, but the telephone was out of order. So Ihad to abandon my wish to give a supper-party .’
I answered, of course, that analysis was the only way of deciding on
the meaning of the dream; though I admitted that at ﬁrst sight it seemedsensible and coherent and looked like the reverse of a wish-fulﬁlment.‘But what material did the dream arise from? As you know, the instigationto a dream is always to be found in the events of the previous day.’
Analysis.—My patient’s husband, an honest and capable wholesale
butcher, had remarked to her the day before that he was getting too stoutand therefore intended to start on a course of weight-reduction. He pro-posed to rise early, do physical exercises, keep to a strict diet, and above allaccept no more invitations to supper.—She laughingly added that her hus-band, at the place where he regularly lunched, had made the acquaintanceof a painter, who had pressed him to be allowed to paint his portrait, as hehad never seen such expressive features. Her husband however had repliedin his blunt manner that he was much obliged, but he was sure the painterwould prefer a piece of a pretty young girl’s behind to the whole of his face.
1171 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 Cf. the phrase ‘sitting for one’s portrait’ and Goethe’s lines:
Und wenn er keinen Hintern hat,
Wie mag der Edle sitzen?
[And if he hasn’t a behind,
How can his Lordship sit?
(From ‘Totalität,’ 1814–15.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 171She was very much in love with her husband now and teased him a lot. She
had begged him, too, not to give her any caviare.
I asked her what that meant; and she explained that she had wished
for a long time that she could have a caviare sandwich every morning buthad grudged the expense. Of course her husband would have let her haveit at once if she had asked him. But, on the contrary, she had asked himnotto give her any caviare, so that she could go on teasing him about it.
This explanation struck me as unconvincing. Inadequate reasons
like this usually conceal unconfessed motives. They remind one of Bernheim’s hypnotized patients. When one of these carries out a post- hypnotic suggestion and is asked why he is acting in this way, instead ofsaying that he has no idea, he feels compelled to invent some obviouslyunsatisfactory reason. The same was no doubt true of my patient and thecaviare. I saw that she was obliged to create an unfulﬁlled wish for herselfin her actual life; and the dream represented this renunciation as havingbeen put into effect. But why was it that she stood in need of an unful-ﬁlled wish?
The associations which she had so far produced had not been sufﬁ-
cient to interpret the dream. I pressed her for some more. After a shortpause, such as would correspond to the overcoming of a resistance, shewent on to tell me that the day before she had visited a woman friend ofwhom she confessed she felt jealous because her (my patient’s) husbandwas constantly singing her praises. Fortunately this friend of hers is veryskinny and thin and her husband admires a plumper ﬁgure. I asked herwhat she had talked about to her thin friend. Naturally, she replied, ofthat lady’s wish to grow a little stouter. Her friend had enquired, too:‘When are you going to ask us to another meal? You always feed oneso well.’
The meaning of the dream was now clear, and I was able to say to my
patient: ‘It is just as though when she made this suggestion you said toyourself: “A likely thing! I’m to ask you to come and eat in my house sothat you may get stout and attract my husband still more! I’d rather nevergive another supper-party.” What the dream was saying to you was thatyou were unable to give any supper-parties, and it was thus fulﬁlling yourwish not to help your friend to grow plumper. The fact that what peopleeat at parties makes them stout had been brought home to you by yourhusband’s decision not to accept any more invitations to supper in the in-terests of his plan to reduce his weight.’ All that was now lacking was172 IV. Distortion in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 172some coincidence to conﬁrm the solution. The smoked salmon in the
dream had not yet been accounted for. ‘How,’ I asked, ‘did you arrive atthe salmon that came into your dream?’ ‘Oh,’ she replied, ‘smokedsalmon is my friend’s favourite dish.’ I happen to be acquainted with thelady in question myself, and I can conﬁrm the fact that she grudges her-self salmon no less than my patient grudges herself caviare.
The same dream admits of another and subtler interpretation, which
in fact becomes unavoidable if we take a subsidiary detail into account.(The two interpretations are not mutually contradictory, but both coverthe same ground; they are a good instance of the fact that dreams, likeall other psychopathological structures, regularly have more than onemeaning.) My patient, it will be remembered, at the same time as she wasoccupied with her dream of the renunciation of a wish, was also tryingto bring about a renounced wish (for the caviare sandwich) in real life.Her friend had also given expression to a wish—to become stouter—andit would not have been surprising if my patient had dreamt that herfriend’s wish was unfulﬁlled; for my patient’s own wish was that herfriend’s wish (to put on weight) should not be fulﬁlled. But instead of thisshe dreamt that one of her own wishes was not fulﬁlled. Thus the dream
will acquire a new interpretation if we suppose that the person indicatedin the dream was not herself but her friend, that she had put herself inher friend’s place, or, as we might say, that she had ‘identiﬁed’ herself withher friend. I believe she had in fact done this; and the circumstance of herhaving brought about a renounced wish in real life was evidence of this identiﬁcation.
What is the meaning of hysterical identiﬁcation? It requires a some-
what lengthy explanation. Identiﬁcation is a highly important factor inthe mechanism of hysterical symptoms. It enables patients to express intheir symptoms not only their own experiences but those of a large num-ber of other people; it enables them, as it were, to suffer on behalf of awhole crowd of people and to act all the parts in a play single-handed. Ishall be told that this is not more than the familiar hysterical imitation,the capacity of hysterics to imitate any symptoms in other people thatmay have struck their attention—sympathy, as it were, intensiﬁed to thepoint of reproduction. This, however, does no more than show us thepath along which the psychical process in hysterical imitation proceeds.The path is something different from the mental act which proceedsalong it. The latter is a little more complicated than the common picture173 IV. Distortion in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 173of hysterical imitation; it consists in the unconscious drawing of an infer-
ence, as an example will make clear. Supposing a physician is treating awoman patient, who is subject to a particular kind of spasm, in a hospitalward among a number of other patients. He will show no surprise if heﬁnds one morning that this particular kind of hysterical attack has foundimitators. He will merely say: ‘The other patients have seen it and copiedit; it’s a case of psychical infection.’ That is true; but the psychical infec-tion has occurred along some such lines as these. As a rule, patients knowmore about one another than the doctor does about any of them; and af-ter the doctor’s visit is over they turn their attention to one another. Letus imagine that this patient had her attack on a particular day; then theothers will quickly discover that it was caused by a letter from home, therevival of some unhappy love-affair, or some such thing. Their sympathyis aroused and they draw the following inference, though it fails to pene-trate into consciousness: ‘If a cause like this can produce an attack likethis, I may have the same kind of attack since I have the same grounds forhaving it.’ If this inference were capable of entering consciousness, itmight possibly give rise to a fearof having the same kind of attack. But
in fact the inference is made in a different psychical region, and conse-quently results in the actual realization of the dreaded symptom. Thusidentiﬁcation is not simple imitation but assimilation on the basis of a
similar aetiological pretension; it expresses a resemblance and is derivedfrom a common element which remains in the unconscious.
Identiﬁcation is most frequently used in hysteria to express a common
sexual element. A hysterical woman identiﬁes herself in her symptoms
most readily—though not exclusively—with people with whom she hashad sexual relations or with people who have had sexual relations with thesame people as herself. Linguistic usage takes this into account, for twolovers are spoken of as being ‘one.’ In hysterical phantasies, just as indreams, it is enough for purposes of identiﬁcation that the subject shouldhave thoughts of sexual relations without their having necessarily taken
place in reality. Thus the patient whose dream I have been discussing wasmerely following the rules of hysterical processes of thought in expressingher jealousy of her friend (which incidentally she herself knew was unjus-tiﬁed) by taking her place in the dream and identifying herself with herby creating a symptom—the renounced wish. The process might be ex-pressed verbally thus: my patient put herself in her friend’s place in thedream because her friend was taking my patient’s place with her husband174 IV. Distortion in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 174and because she (my patient) wanted to take her friend’s place in her hus-
band’s high opinion.1
A contradiction to my theory of dreams produced by another of my
women patients (the cleverest of all my dreamers) was resolved more simply, but upon the same pattern: namely that the non-fulﬁlment of onewish meant the fulﬁlment of another. One day I had been explaining toher that dreams are fulﬁlments of wishes. Next day she brought me adream in which she was travelling down with her mother-in-law to theplace in the country where they were to spend their holidays together.Now I knew that she had violently rebelled against the idea of spendingthe summer near her mother-in-law and that a few days earlier she hadsuccessfully avoided the propinquity she dreaded by engaging rooms in afar distant resort. And now her dream had undone the solution she hadwished for: was not this the sharpest possible contradiction of my theorythat in dreams wishes are fulﬁlled? No doubt; and it was only necessary tofollow the dream’s logical consequence in order to arrive at its interpreta-tion. The dream showed that I was wrong. Thus it was her wish that I
might be wrong, and her dream showed that wish fulﬁlled. But her wish that
I might be wrong, which was fulﬁlled in connection with her summer hol-idays, related in fact to another and more serious matter. For at about thesame time I had inferred from the material produced in her analysis thatat a particular period of her life something must have occurred that was ofimportance in determining her illness. She had disputed this, since she hadno recollection of it; but soon afterwards it had turned out that I was right.175 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 I myself regret the insertion into my argument of excerpts from the psycho -
pathology of hysteria. [See p. 128 f.] Their fragmentary presentation and de-
tachment from their context cannot fail to detract from their enlightening effect.If, however, they serve to indicate the intimate connection between the topic ofdreams and that of the psychoneuroses, they will have fulﬁlled the purpose forwhich they are inserted.—[This is Freud’s ﬁrst published discussion of identiﬁ-cation, though he had referred to it earlier, in his correspondence with Fliess (e.g.in Letter 58 of February 8, 1897, and Manuscript L of May 2, 1897). Thoughhe touched upon the subject here and there in later publications, his ﬁrst lengthyconsideration of it after the present one was more than twenty years later—inChapter VII of Group Psychology (Freud, 1921 c). The different topic of identiﬁ-
cation as part of the dream-work is discussed below on pp. 336 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 175Thus her wish that I might be wrong, which was transformed into her
dream of spending her holidays with her mother-in-law, corresponded toa well-justiﬁed wish that the events of which she was then becoming awarefor the ﬁrst time might never have occurred.
I have ventured to interpret—without any analysis, but only by a
guess—a small episode which occurred to a friend of mine who was in thesame class as I was all through our career at a secondary school. One day helistened to a lecture which I gave before a small audience on the novel ideathat dreams were wish-fulﬁlments. He went home and dreamt that he had
lost all his cases (he was a barrister) and afterwards arraigned me on the sub-
ject. I evaded the issue by telling him that after all one can’t win allone’s
cases. But to myself I thought: ‘Considering that for eight whole years I saton the front bench as top of the class while he drifted about somewhere inthe middle, he can hardly fail to nourish a wish, left over from his school-days, that some day or other I may come a complete cropper.’
A dream of a gloomier kind was also brought up against me by a pa-
tient as an objection to the theory of wishful dreams.
The patient, who was a young girl, began thus: ‘As you will remember,
my sister has only one boy left now—Karl; she lost his elder brother,Otto, while I was still living with her. Otto was my favourite; I more orless brought him up. I’m fond of the little one too, but of course notnearly so fond as I was of the one who died. Last night, then, I dreamtthat I saw Karl lying before me dead. He was lying in his little cofﬁn with his
hands folded and with candles all round—in fact just like little Otto, whosedeath was such a blow to me. Now tell me, what can that mean? You know
me. Am I such a wicked person that I can wish my sister to lose the onechild she still has? Or does the dream mean that I would rather Karl weredead than Otto whom I was so much fonder of?’
I assured her that this last interpretation was out of the question. And
after reﬂecting a little I was able to give her the correct interpretation ofthe dream, which she afterwards conﬁrmed. I was able to do so because Iwas familiar with the whole of the dreamer’s previous history.
The girl had early been left an orphan and had been brought up in the
house of a much older sister. Among the friends who visited at the housewas a man who made a lasting impression on her heart. For a time it hadseemed as though her scarcely acknowledged relations with him would leadto marriage; but this happy outcome was brought to nothing by her sister,176 IV. Distortion in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 176whose motives were never fully explained. After the breach the man ceased
to visit the house; and shortly after the death of little Otto, on to whom shehad meanwhile turned her affection, my patient herself set up on her own.She did not succeed, however, in freeing herself from her attachment to hersister’s friend. Her pride bade her avoid him; but she was unable to transferher love to any of the other admirers who presented themselves later. When-ever it was announced that the object of her affections, who was by profes-sion a literary man, was to give a lecture anywhere, she was invariably in theaudience; and she took every possible opportunity of seeing him from a dis-tance on neutral ground. I remembered that she had told me the day beforethat the Professor was going to a particular concert and that she intendedto go to it as well so as to enjoy a glimpse of him once more. That had beenon the day before the dream, and the concert was to take place on the dayon which she told me the dream. It was therefore easy for me to constructthe correct interpretation, and I asked her whether she could think of any-thing that happened after little Otto’s death. She answered at once: ‘Ofcourse; the Professor came to see us again after a long absence, and I sawhim once more beside little Otto’s cofﬁn.’ This was exactly what I had ex-pected, and I interpreted the dream in this way: ‘If now the other boy wereto die, the same thing would happen. You would spend the day with yoursister and the Professor would be certain to come to offer his condolences,so that you would see him again under the same conditions as the othertime. The dream means no more than your wish to see him once more, awish which you are inwardly struggling against. I know you have a ticketfor today’s concert in your pocket. Your dream was a dream of impatience:it anticipated the glimpse you are to have of him today by a few hours.’
In order to conceal her wish, she had evidently chosen a situation in
which such wishes are usually suppressed, a situation in which one is somuch ﬁlled with grief that one has no thought of love. Yet it is quite pos-sible that even in the real situation of which the dream was an exactreplica, beside the cofﬁn of the elder boy whom she had loved still more,she may have been unable to suppress her tender feelings for the visitorwho had been absent so long.
1
A similar dream of another woman patient had a different explanation.
When she was young she had been remarkable for her ready wit and177 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 [This dream is referred to again on pp. 266 f. and 469; it is also brieﬂy recorded
in Section IX of Freud, 1901a (Standard Ed., 5, 675).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 177cheerful disposition; and these characteristics were still to be seen, at all
events in the ideas that occurred to her during the treatment. In the courseof a longish dream, this lady imagined that she saw her only, ﬁfteen-year-old daughter lying dead ‘in a case.’ She had half a mind to use the sceneas an objection to the wish-fulﬁlment theory, though she herself suspectedthat the detail of the ‘case’ must point the way to another view of thedream.
1In the course of the analysis she recalled that at a party the
evening before there had been some talk about the English word ‘box’ andthe various ways in which it could be translated into German—such as‘Schachtel ’ [‘case’], ‘Loge ’ [‘box at the theatre’], ‘Kasten ’ [‘chest’], ‘ Ohrfeige ’
[‘box on the ear’], and so on. Other portions of the same dream enabledus to discover further that she had guessed that the English ‘box’ was re-lated to the German ‘Büchse ’ [‘receptacle’], and that she had then been
plagued by a recollection that ‘ Büchse’ is used as a vulgar term for the fe-
male genitals. If some allowance was made for the limits of her knowledgeof topographical anatomy, it might be presumed, therefore, that the childlying in the case meant an embryo in the womb. After being enlightenedup to this point, she no longer denied that the dream-picture corre-sponded to a wish of hers. Like so many young married women, she hadbeen far from pleased when she became pregnant; and more than once shehad allowed herself to wish that the child in her womb might die. Indeed,in a ﬁt of rage after a violent scene with her husband, she had beaten withher ﬁsts on her body so as to hit the child inside it. Thus the dead childwas in fact the fulﬁlment of a wish, but of a wish that had been put asideﬁfteen years earlier. It is scarcely to be wondered at if a wish that was ful-ﬁlled after such a long delay was not recognized. Too much had changedin the interval.
2
I shall have to return to the group of dreams to which the last two exam-
ples belong (dreams dealing with the death of relatives of whom the dreameris fond) when I come to consider ‘typical’ dreams [pp. 266 ff.]. I shall thenbe able to show from further instances that, in spite of their unwished-forcontents, all such dreams must be interpreted as wish-fulﬁlments.178 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 Like the smoked salmon in the dream of the abandoned supper-party. [See
above, p. 172 f.]
2 [This dream is further discussed on p. 267 and is also reported brieﬂy in Lecture
XIII of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916–17).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 178I owe the following dream, not to a patient, but to an intelligent jurist
of my acquaintance. He told it to me, once again, in order to restrain me
from rash generalizing on the theory of wishful dreams. ‘I dreamt,’ said myinformant, ‘that I came up to my house with a lady on my arm. A closed car-riage was standing in front of it and a man came up to me, showed me his cre-dentials as a police ofﬁcer and requested me to follow him. I asked him to allowme a little time to put my affairs in order. Can you suppose that I have a
wish to be arrested?’—Of course not, I could only agree. Do you happento know the charge on which you were arrested?—‘Yes, for infanticide, Ibelieve.’—Infanticide? But surely you’re aware that that’s a crime that canonly be committed by a mother on a newborn child?—‘Quite true.’
1—
And what were the circumstances in which you had the dream? What hap-pened on the previous evening?—‘I would prefer not to tell you. It’s adelicate matter.’—Nevertheless I shall have to hear it; otherwise we shallhave to give up the idea of interpreting the dream.—‘Very well then, lis-ten. I didn’t spend last night at home but with a lady who means a greatdeal to me. When we woke up in the morning there was a further passagebetween us, after which I went to sleep again and had the dream I de-scribed to you.’—Is she a married woman?—‘Yes.’—And you don’t wantto have a child by her?—‘Oh, no; that might give us away.’—So you don’tpractice normal intercourse?—‘I take the precaution of withdrawing be-fore ejaculation.’—I think I may assume that you had used this device sev-eral times during the night, and that after repeating it in the morning youfelt a little uncertain whether you had carried it out successfully.—‘That’spossible, no doubt.’—In that case your dream was the fulﬁlment of a wish.It gave you a reassurance that you had not procreated a child, or, whatamounts to the same thing, that you had killed a child. The intermediatelinks are easily indicated. You remember that a few days ago we were talk-ing about marriage difﬁculties and how inconsistent it is that there shouldbe no objection to carrying out intercourse in such a way that no fertiliza-tion takes place, whereas any interference when once the ovum and semenhave come together and a foetus has been formed is punished as a crime.We went on to recall the mediaeval controversy over the exact point of179 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 It often happens that the account ﬁrst given of a dream is incomplete and that
the memory of the omitted portions only emerges in the course of analysis.
These subsequently added portions regularly turn out to provide the key to thedream’s interpretation. Cf. the discussion below on the forgetting of dreams [pp.522 ff.].9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 179time at which the soul enters the foetus, since it is not until after that that
the concept of murder becomes applicable. No doubt, too, you knowLenau’s gruesome poem [‘Das tote Glück’] in which child murder andchild prevention are equated.—‘Oddly enough I happened to think ofLenau this morning, quite by chance, as it seemed.’—An  after-echo ofyour dream. And now I can show you another incidental wish-fulﬁlmentcontained in your dream. You came up to your house with the lady onyour arm. Thus you were bringing her home,
1instead of spending the
night in her house as you did in reality. There may be more than one rea-son why the wish-fulﬁlment which constitutes the core of the dream wasdisguised in such a disagreeable form. Perhaps you have learned from mypaper on the aetiology of anxiety neurosis [Freud, 1895 b] that I regard
coitus interruptus as one of the aetiological factors in the development of
neurotic anxiety? It would tally with this if, after carrying out sexual inter-course in this way several times, you were left in an uneasy mood whichafterwards became an element in the construction of your dream. More-over, you made use of this moodiness to help disguise the wish-fulﬁlment.[Cf. p. 492.] Incidentally, your reference to infanticide has not been ex-plained. How did you come to light on this speciﬁcally feminine crime?—‘I must admit that some years ago I became involved in an occurrence ofthat kind. I was responsible for a girl’s trying to avoid the consequence ofa love-affair with me by means of an abortion. I had nothing to do withher carrying out her intention, but for a long time I naturally felt very ner-vous in case the business came out.’—I quite understand that. This recol-lection provides a second reason why you must have been worried by yoursuspicion that your device might have gone wrong.
2
A young physician who heard me describe this dream during a course
of lectures must have been greatly struck by it, for he promptly re-dreamtit, applying the same pattern of thought to another theme. The day be-fore, he had sent in his income tax return, which he had ﬁlled in perfectlyhonestly, since he had very little to declare. He then had a dream that an
acquaintance of his came to him from a meeting of the tax commissioners andinformed him that, while no objection had been raised to any of the other taxreturns, general suspicion had been aroused by his and a heavy ﬁne had beenimposed on him. The dream was a poorly disguised fulﬁlment of his wish180 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 [The German ‘ heimführen’ means both ‘to bring home’ and ‘to marry.’]
2 [This dream was recorded in Draft I, attached to Freud’s letter to Fliess of May
2, 1897 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 61).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 180to be known as a doctor with a large income. It recalls the well-known
story of the girl who was advised not to accept a suitor because he had aviolent temper and would be sure to beat her if they were married. ‘Ifonly he’d begun beating me already!’ the girl replied. Her wish to be mar-ried was so intense that she was ready to take the threatened unpleasant-ness into the bargain, and even went so far as to turn it into a wish.
The very frequent dreams,
1which appear to stand in contradiction to
my theory because their subject-matter is the frustration of a wish or theoccurrence of something clearly unwished-for, may be brought togetherunder the heading of ‘counter-wish dreams.’ If these dreams are consid-ered as a whole, it seems to me possible to trace them back to two princi-ples; I have not yet mentioned one of these, although it plays a large partnot only in people’s dreams but in their lives as well. One of the two mo-tive forces leading to such dreams is the wish that I may be wrong. Thesedreams appear regularly in the course of my treatments when a patient isin a state of resistance to me; and I can count almost certainly on provok-ing one of them after I have explained to a patient for the ﬁrst time mytheory that dreams are fulﬁlment of wishes.
2Indeed, it is to be expected
that the same thing will happen to some of the readers of the presentbook: they will be quite ready to have one of their wishes frustrated in adream if only their wish that I may be wrong can be fulﬁlled.
The same point is illustrated by one last dream of the kind which I
will quote from a patient under treatment. This was the dream of a girlwho had succeeded in her struggle to continue her treatment with meagainst the will of her relatives and of the authorities whose opinions hadbeen consulted. She dreamt that her people forbade her to go on coming to
me. She then reminded me of a promise I had given her that if necessary Iwould continue the treatment without a fee. To this I replied: ‘I cannot makeany allowances in money matters. ’ It must be admitted that it was not easy
to point to the wish-fulﬁlment in this instance. But in all such cases onediscovers a second riddle, the solution of which helps one to solve theoriginal one. What was the origin of the words she put into my mouth?Of course I had said nothing of the kind to her; but one of her brothers,181 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1909.]
2 [Footnote added 1911:] During the last few years similar ‘counter-wish dreams’
have repeatedly been reported to me by people who have heard me lecturing, as
a reaction to ﬁrst making the acquaintance of my ‘wishful’ theory of dreams.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 181and the one by whom she was most inﬂuenced, had been good enough
to attribute this sentiment to me. The dream was thus intended to proveher brother right. And it was not only in her dreams that she insisted onhis being right; the same idea dominated her whole life and it was themotive of her illness.
A dream
1which seems at ﬁrst sight to put special difﬁculties in the
way of the wish-fulﬁlment theory was dreamt and interpreted by a physi-cian, and reported by August Stärcke (1911): ‘ I saw upon my left index-
ﬁnger the ﬁrst indication [Primäraffekt] of syphilis on the terminal phalange .’
The reﬂection that, apart from the dream’s unwished-for content, it ap-pears to be clear and coherent, might dissuade us from analysing it. If,however, we are prepared to face the trouble involved, we shall ﬁnd that‘Primäraffekt’ was equivalent to a ‘ prima affectio’ (a ﬁrst love), and that the
repellent ulcer turned out, to quote Stärcke’s words, to ‘stand for wish-fulﬁlments that were highly charged with emotion.’
The second motive for counter-wish dreams
2is so obvious that it is
easy to overlook it, as I did myself for some considerable time. There is amasochistic component in the sexual constitution of many people, whicharises from the reversal of an aggressive, sadistic component into its op-posite.
3Those who ﬁnd their pleasure, not in having physical pain in-
ﬂicted on them, but in humiliation and mental torture, may be describedas ‘mental masochists.’ It will at once be seen that people of this kind canhave counter-wish dreams and unpleasurable dreams, which are none theless wish-fulﬁlments since they satisfy their masochistic inclinations. I willquote one such dream, produced by a young man who in his earlier yearshad greatly tormented his elder brother, to whom he had a homosexualattachment. His character having undergone a fundamental change, hehad the following dream, which was in three pieces: I. His elder brotherwas chafﬁng him. II. Two grown men were caressing each other with a homo-sexual purpose. III. His brother had sold the business of which he himself hadlooked forward to becoming the director. He awoke from the last dream
with the most distressing feelings. Nevertheless it was a masochistic wish-ful dream, and might be translated thus: ‘It would serve me right if mybrother were to confront me with this sale as a punishment for all the tor-ments he had to put up with from me.’182 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.]
2 [This paragraph was added in 1909.]
3 [The author’s amended views on this subject will be found in Freud, 1924c .]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 182I hope that the foregoing examples will be enough (till the next objec-
tion is raised) to make it seem plausible that even dreams with a distressing
content are to be construed as wish-fulﬁlments.1Nor will anyone regard it
as a chance coincidence that the interpretation of these dreams hasbrought us up each time against topics about which people are loth tospeak or to think. The distressing feeling aroused by these dreams is nodoubt identical with the repugnance which tends (usually with success) torestrain us from discussing or mentioning such topics, and which each ofus has to overcome if we nevertheless ﬁnd ourselves compelled to embarkon them. But the unpleasurable feeling which thus recurs in dreams doesnot disprove the existence of a wish. Everyone has wishes that he wouldprefer not to disclose to other people, and wishes that he will not admiteven to himself. On the other hand, we are justiﬁed in linking the unplea-surable character of all these dreams with the fact of dream-distortion. Andwe are justiﬁed in concluding that these dreams are distorted and the wish-fulﬁlment contained in them disguised to the point of being unrecogniz-able precisely owing to the repugnance felt for the topic of the dream orfor the wish derived from it and to an intention to repress them. The dis-tortion in the dream is thus shown in fact to be an act of the censorship.We shall be taking into account everything that has been brought to lightby our analysis of unpleasurable dreams if we make the following modiﬁca -tion in the formula in which we have sought to express the nature of dreams:a dream is a (disguised )fulﬁlment of a (suppressed or repressed )wish.
2
There remain to be discussed anxiety-dreams as a special sub-species of
dreams with a distressing content. The notion of regarding these as wish -ful dreams will meet with very little sympathy from the unenlightened.183 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 [The following sentence was included in the text, in a slightly different form, in
1919 and printed as a footnote in 1925:] ‘I must point out that the subject is
not yet ﬁnally disposed of; I shall return to it later on.’ [See pp. 557.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] A great living writer, who, as I have been told, refuses to
hear anything of psycho-analysis or the interpretation of dreams, has independ-ently arrived at an almost identical formula for the nature of dreams. He speaksof a dream as ‘the unauthorized emergence of suppressed desires and wishes, un-der false features and name.’ (Spitteler, 1914, 1.)
[Added 1911:] I shall anticipate questions which will be discussed later by
quoting at this point Otto Rank’s enlargement and modiﬁcation of the abovebasic formula: ‘On the basis and with the help of repressed, infantile sexual ma-terial, dreams regularly represent present-day, and also as a rule erotic, wishes asfulﬁlled, in a veiled and symbolically disguised shape.’ (Rank, 1910, [519].)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 183Nevertheless I can deal with anxiety-dreams very brieﬂy at this point. They
do not present us with a new aspect of the dream-problem; what they faceus with is the whole question of neurotic anxiety. The anxiety that we feelin a dream is only apparently explained by the dream’s content. If we sub-
mit the content of the dream to analysis, we ﬁnd that the anxiety in thedream is no better justiﬁed by the dream’s content than, let us say, the anxiety in a phobia is justiﬁed by the idea to which the phobia relates. Nodoubt it is true, for instance, that it is possible to fall out of a window andthat there is therefore reason for exercising a certain degree of caution inthe neighbourhood of a window; but we cannot see why the anxiety feltin a phobia on this subject is so great and pursues the patient far beyondits occasion.
1We ﬁnd then that the same thing may be validly asserted
both of phobias and of anxiety-dreams: in both cases the anxiety is onlysuperﬁcially attached to the idea that accompanies it; it originates from an-other source.184 IV. Distortion in Dreams
[Added 1925:] I have nowhere stated that I adopted Rank’s formula as my
own. The shorter version, as stated in the text above, seems to me adequate. But
the mere fact of my having mentioned Rank’s modiﬁcation has been enough tounleash countless accusations against psychoanalysis of having asserted that ‘alldreams have a sexual content.’
If this sentence is taken in the sense in which it was intended, it merely shows
the unconscientious manner in which critics are accustomed to perform theirfunctions, and the readiness with which opponents overlook the clearest state-ments if they do not give scope to their aggressive inclinations. For only a fewpages earlier [pp. 152 ff.] I had mentioned the variety of the wishes whose fulﬁl-ments are to be found in children’s dreams (wishes to take part in an excursion ora sail on a lake, or to make up for a missed meal, and so on); and in other passagesI had discussed dreams of hunger [p. 155 n.], dreams stimulated by thirst [pp. 148
f.] or by excretory needs, and dreams of mere convenience [p. 150]. Even Rankhimself made no absolute assertion. The words he used were ‘also as a rule erotic
wishes,’ and what he said can be amply conﬁrmed in the dreams of most adults.
The situation would be different if ‘sexual’ was being used by my critics in
the sense in which it is now commonly employed in psychoanalysis—in thesense of ‘Eros.’ But my opponents are scarcely likely to have had in mind the in-teresting problem of whether all dreams are created by ‘libidinal’ instinctualforces as contrasted with ‘destructive’ ones. [Cf. Freud, The Ego and the Id,
Chapter IV (Freud, 1923b).]
1 [This particular form of phobia, the fear of falling out of windows, was referred
to by Freud in a letter to Fliess of December 12, 1896 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 53),
and again much later in his paper on ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (Freud, 1922 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 184Since this intimate connection exists between anxiety in dreams and
in neuroses, in discussing the former I must refer to the latter. In a short
paper on anxiety-neurosis (Freud, 1895 b), I argued some time ago that
neurotic anxiety is derived from sexual life and corresponds to libidowhich has been diverted from its purpose and has found no employ-ment.
1Since then this formula has met the test of time; and it enables us
now to infer from it that anxiety-dreams are dreams with a sexual con-tent, the libido belonging to which has been transformed into anxiety.There will be an opportunity later to support this assertion by the analysisof some neurotic patients’ dreams.
2In the course, too, of a further at-
tempt to arrive at a theory of dreams, I shall have occasion to discuss oncemore the determinants of anxiety-dreams and their compatibility withthe theory of wish-fulﬁlment.185 IV. Distortion in Dreams
1 [The author’s later views on the relation between libido and anxiety will be
found in his Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety (1926d ).]
2 [Freud evidently changed his mind on this point: see pp. 578 ff., where, how-
ever, two anxiety-dreams are analysed and the whole subject of anxiety-dreams
is again discussed.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 1859780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 186CHAPTER V
THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS
When the analysis of the dream of Irma’s injection showed us that a
dream could be the fulﬁlment of a wish, our interest was at ﬁrst wholly ab-
sorbed by the question of whether we had come upon a universal charac-teristic of dreams, and for the time being we stiﬂed our curiosity about anyother scientiﬁc problems that may have arisen during the work of the in-terpretation. Having followed one path to its end, we may now retrace oursteps and choose another starting-point for our rambles through the prob-lems of dream-life: for the time being, we may leave the topic of wish- fulﬁlment on one side, though we are still far from having exhausted it.
Now that the application of our procedure for interpreting dreams
 enables us to disclose a latent content in them which is of far greater sig-
niﬁcance than their manifest one, the pressing task at once arises of re-
 examining one by one the various problems raised by dreams, to seewhether we may not now be in a position to ﬁnd satisfactory solutions forthe conundrums and contradictions which seemed intractable so long aswe were only acquainted with the manifest content.
In the ﬁrst chapter I have given a detailed account of the views of the
authorities on the relation of dreams with waking life [Section A] and onthe origin of the material of dreams [Section C]. No doubt, too, my readerswill recall the three characteristics of memory in dreams [Section B], whichhave been so often remarked on but which have never been explained:
(1) Dreams show a clear preference for the impressions of the imme-
diately preceding days [pp. 50 f.]. Cf. Robert [1886, 46], Strümpell [1877,39], Hildebrandt [1875, 11] and Hallam and Weed [1896, 410 f.].
1879780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 187(2) They make their selection upon different principles from our
waking memory, since they do not recall what is essential and important
but what is subsidiary and unnoticed. [Pp. 51 ff.]
(3) They have at their disposal the earliest impressions of our child-
hood and even bring up details from that period of our life which, onceagain, strike us as trivial and which in our waking state we believe to havebeen long since forgotten. [Pp. 48 ff.]
1
All these peculiarities shown by dreams in their choice of material
have, of course, only been studied by earlier writers in connection withtheir manifest content.
(A)
RECENT AND INDIFFERENT MATERIAL IN DREAMS
If I examine my own experience on the subject of the origin of the el-
ements included in the content of dreams, I must begin with an assertionthat in every dream it is possible to ﬁnd a point of contact with the expe-riences of the previous day. This view is conﬁrmed by every dream that Ilook into, whether my own or anyone else’s. Bearing this fact in mind, Iam able, on occasion, to begin a dream’s interpretation by looking for theevent of the previous day which set it in motion; in many instances, in-deed, this is the easiest method.
2In the two dreams which I have analysed
in detail in my last chapters (the dream of Irma’s injection and the dreamof my uncle with a yellow beard) the connection with the previous day isso obvious as to require no further comment. But in order to show theregularity with which such a connection can be traced, I will go throughthe records of my own dreams and give some instances. I shall only quoteenough of the dream to indicate the source we are looking for:188 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 The view adopted by Robert [1886, 9 f.] that the purpose of dreams is to unbur-
den our memory of the useless impressions of daytime [cf. pp. 105 f.] is plainly
no longer tenable if indifferent memory images from our childhood appear at allfrequently in dreams. Otherwise we could only conclude that dreams performtheir function most inadequately.
2 [The different ways of beginning the interpretation of a dream are discussed in
Section I of Freud, 1923c .]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 188(1) I was visiting a house into which I had difﬁculty in gaining admit-
tance . . . ; in the meantime I kept a lady waiting .
Source: I had had a conversation with a female relative the evening be-
fore in which I had told her that she would have to wait for a purchase
she wanted to make till . . . etc.
(2) I had written a monograph on a certain (indistinct) species of plant .
Source: That morning I had seen a monograph on the genus Cyclamen
in the window of a bookshop. [See below, pp. 193 ff.]
(3) I saw two women in the street , a mother and daughter, the latter
of whom was a patient of mine .
Source: One of my patients had explained to me the previous evening
the difﬁculties her mother was putting in the way of her continuing her
treatment.
(4) I took out a subscription in S. and R.’s bookshop for a periodical cost-
ingtwenty ﬂorins a year.
Source: My wife had reminded me the day before that I still owed her
twenty ﬂorins for the weekly household expenses.
(5) I received a communication from the Social Democratic Commit-
tee, treating me as though I were a member .
Source: I had received communications simultaneously from the Liberal
Election Committee and from the Council of the Humanitarian League,
of which latter body I was in fact a member.
(6) A man standing on a cliff in the middle of the sea, in the style
of Böcklin .
Source: Dreyfus on the Ile du Diable; I had had news at the same time
from my relatives in England , etc.
The question may be raised whether the point of contact with the
dream is invariably the events of the immediately preceding day or whether
it may go back to impressions derived from a rather more extensive period
of the most recent past. It is unlikely that this question involves any matterof theoretical importance; nevertheless I am inclined to decide in favour ofthe exclusiveness of the claims of the day immediately preceding thedream—which I shall speak of as the ‘dream-day.’ Whenever it has seemedat ﬁrst that the source of a dream was an impression two or three days ear-lier, closer enquiry has convinced me that the impression had been recalledon the previous day and thus that it was possible to show that a reproduc-tion of the impression, occurring on the previous day, could be inserted be-tween the day of the original event and the time of the dream; moreover it189 A. Recent and Indifferent Material9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 189has been possible to indicate the contingency on the previous day which
may have led to the recalling of the older impression.
On the other hand1I do not feel convinced that there is any regular
interval of biological signiﬁcance between the instigating daytime impres-sion and its recurrence in the dream. (Swoboda, 1904, has mentioned aninitial period of eighteen hours in this connection.)
2190 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [This paragraph was added in 1909.]
2 [Footnote added 1911:] As I have mentioned in a postscript to my ﬁrst chapter
(p. 120), Hermann Swoboda [1904] has made a far-reaching application to the
mental ﬁeld of the biological periodic intervals of 23 and 28 days discovered byWilhelm Fliess [1906]. He has asserted in particular that these periods deter-mine the emergence of the elements which appear in dreams. No essential mod-iﬁcation in dream-interpretation would be involved if this fact were to beestablished; it would merely provide a fresh source of origin of dream-material.I have, however, recently made some investigations upon my own dreams, to testhow far the ‘theory of periodicity’ is applicable to them. For this purpose I chosesome specially outstanding dream-elements the time of whose appearance in reallife could be determined with certainty.
I.Dream of October 1 st–2nd, 1910
(Fragment) . . . Somewhere in Italy. Three daughters were showing me some small
curios, as though we were in an antique shop, and were sitting on my lap. I com-mented on one of the objects: ‘Why, you got that from me,’ and saw plainly before mea small proﬁle relief with the clear-cut features of Savonarola.
When had I last seen a portrait of Savonarola? My travel-diary proved that I
had been in Florence on September 4th and 5th. While I was there I thought Iwould show my travelling companion the medallion bearing the fanaticalmonk’s features, let into the pavement of the Piazza della Signoria, which marksthe place where he was burned. I pointed it out to him, I believe, on the morn-ing of the 3rd. [Misprinted ‘5th’ in recent editions.] Between this impressionand its reappearance in the dream 27 + 1 days elapsed—Fliess’s ‘female period.’Unluckily for the conclusiveness of this example, however, I must add that onthe actual ‘dream-day’ I had a visit (for the ﬁrst time since my return) from a ca-pable but gloomy-looking medical colleague of mine whom I had many yearsbefore nicknamed ‘Rabbi Savonarola.’ He introduced a patient to me who wassuffering from the effects of an accident to the Pontebba express, in which I my-self had travelled a week earlier, and my thoughts were thus led back to my re-cent visit to Italy. The appearance in the content of the dream of the outstandingelement ‘Savonarola’ is thus accounted for by my colleague’s visit on the dream-day; and the interval of 28 days is deprived of its signiﬁcance.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 190191 A. Recent and Indifferent Material
II. Dream of October 10th–11 th, 1910
I was once more working at chemistry in the University laboratory. Hofrat L. in-
vited me to come somewhere and walked in front of me along the corridor, holding a
lamp or some other instrument before him in his uplifted hand and with his headstretched forward in a peculiar attitude, with a clear-sighted (? far-sighted) lookabout him. Then we crossed an open space. . . . (The remainder was forgotten.)
The most outstanding point in the content of this dream was the way in
which Hofrat L. held the lamp (or magnifying glass) before him, with his eyespeering into the distance. It was many years since I had last seen him; but I knewat once that he was only a substitute ﬁgure in the place of someone else, some-one greater than he—Archimedes, whose statue stands near the Fountain ofArethusa at Syracuse in that very attitude, holding up his burning-glass andpeering out towards the besieging army of the Romans. When did I see thatstatue for the ﬁrst (and last) time? According to my diary it was on the eveningof September 17th; and between then and the time of the dream 13 + 10 = 23days had elapsed—Fliess’s ‘male period.’
Unfortunately, when we go into the interpretation of this dream in greater
 detail, we once again ﬁnd that the coincidence loses some of its conclusiveness.The exciting cause of the dream was the news I received on the dream-day that theclinic, in whose lecture room I was able by courtesy to deliver my lectures, wasshortly to be removed to another locality. I took it for granted that its new situa-tion would be very out of the way and told myself that in that case I might just aswell not have a lecture room at my disposal at all. From that point my thoughtsmust have gone back to the beginning of my career as University Lecturer when Iin fact had no lecture room and when my efforts to get hold of one met with littleresponse from the powerfully placed Hofrats and Professors. In those circum-stances I had gone to L., who at that time held the ofﬁce of Dean of the Facultyand who I believed was friendlily disposed to me, to complain of my troubles. Hepromised to help me, but I heard nothing more from him. In the dream he wasArchimedes, giving me a 
/H9266/H9265~/H9271 /H9268/H9270~/H9275[footing] and himself leading me to the new
locality. Anyone who is an adept at interpretation will guess that the dream-thoughts were not exactly free from ideas of vengeance and self- importance. Itseems clear, in any case, that without this exciting cause Archimedes would scarcelyhave found his way into my dream that night; nor am I convinced that the pow-erful and still recent impression made on me by the statue in Syracuse might nothave produced its effect after some different interval of time.
III. Dream of October 2nd–3rd, 1910
(Fragment) . . . Something about Professor Oser, who had drawn up the menu for
me himself, which had a very soothing effect. . . . (Some more that was forgotten.)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 191Havelock Ellis [1911, 224],1who has also given some attention to this
point, declares that he was unable to ﬁnd any such periodicity in his
dreams in spite of looking for it. He records a dream of being in Spainand of wanting to go to a place called Daraus, Varaus or Zaraus. On wak-ing he could not recall any such place-name, and put the dream on oneside. A few months later he discovered that Zaraus was in fact the nameof a station on the line between San Sebastian and Bilbao, through whichhis train had passed 250 days before he had the dream.
I believe, then, that the instigating agent of every dream is to be
found among the experiences which one has not yet ‘slept on.’ Thus therelations of a dream’s content to impressions of the most recent past(with the single exception of the day immediately preceding the night ofthe dream) differ in no respect from its relations to impressions datingfrom any remoter period. Dreams can select their material from any partof the dreamer’s life, provided only that there is a train of thought link-ing the experience of the dream-day (the ‘recent’ impressions) with theearlier ones.
But why this preference for recent impressions? We shall form some no-
tion on this point, if we submit one of the dreams in the series I have justquoted [p. 189] to a fuller analysis. For this purpose I shall choose the192 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
This dream was a reaction to a digestive disturbance that day, which made me
consider whether I should go to one of my colleagues to have a dietary pre-
scribed for me. My reason for choosing Oser for that purpose, who had died inthe course of the summer, went back to the death of another University teacherwhom I greatly admired, which had occurred shortly before (on October 1st).When had Oser died? and when had I heard of his death? According to a para-graph in the papers he had died on August 22nd. I had been in Holland at thattime and had my Vienna newspaper sent on to me regularly; so that I must haveread of his death on August 24th or 25th. But here the interval no longer corre-sponds to either period. It amounts to 7 + 30 + 2 = 39 days or possibly 40 days.I could not recall having spoken or thought of Oser in the meantime.
Intervals such as this one, which cannot be ﬁtted into the theory of periodic-
ity without further manipulation, occur far more frequently in my dreams thanintervals which can be so ﬁtted. The only relation which I ﬁnd occurs with reg-
ularity is the relation which I have insisted upon in the text and which connectsthe dream with some impression of the dream-day.
1 [This paragraph was added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 192Dream of the Botanical Monograph
I had written a monograph on a certain plant. The book lay before me
and I was at the moment turning over a folded coloured plate. Bound up in
each copy there was a dried specimen of the plant, as though it had been takenfrom a herbarium.
Analysis
That morning I had seen a new book in the window of a bookshop,
bearing the title The Genus Cyclamen— evidently a monograph on that
plant.
Cyclamens, I reﬂected, were my wife’s favourite ﬂowers and I reproached
myself for so rarely remembering to bring her ﬂowers , which was what she
liked.—The subject of ‘ bring ﬂowers’ recalled an anecdote which I had re-
cently repeated to a circle of friends and which I had used as evidence infavour of my theory that forgetting is very often determined by an uncon-scious purpose and that it always enables one to deduce the secret inten-tions of the person who forgets.
1A young woman was accustomed to
receiving a bouquet of ﬂowers from her husband on her birthday. One yearthis token of his affection failed to appear, and she burst into tears. Her hus-band came in and had no idea why she was crying till she told him that to-day was her birthday. He clasped his hand to his head and exclaimed: ‘I’mso sorry, but I’d quite forgotten. I’ll go out at once and fetch your ﬂowers .’
But she was not to be consoled; for she recognized that her husband’s for-getfulness was a proof that she no longer had the same place in his thoughtsas she had formerly.—This lady, Frau L., had met my wife two days beforeI had the dream, had told her that she was feeling quite well and enquiredafter me. Some years ago she had come to me for treatment.
I now made a fresh start. Once, I recalled, I really had written some-
thing in the nature of a monograph on a plant , namely a dissertation on
the coca-plant [Freud, 1884e ], which had drawn Karl Koller’s attention to193 A. Recent and Indifferent Material
1 [The theory was published a few months after the date of the dream, in Freud
(1898b), and then incorporated in The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (Freud,
1901b).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 193the anaesthetic properties of cocaine. I had myself indicated this applica-
tion of the alkaloid in my published paper, but I had not been thoroughenough to pursue the matter further.
1This reminded me that on the
morning of the day after the dream—I had not found time to interpret ittill the evening—I had thought about cocaine in a kind of daydream. Ifever I got glaucoma, I had thought, I should travel to Berlin and get my-self operated on, incognito, in my friend’s [Fliess’s] house, by a surgeonrecommended by him. The operating surgeon, who would have no ideaof my identity, would boast once again of how easily such operationscould be performed since the introduction of cocaine; and I should notgive the slightest hint that I myself had had a share in the discovery. Thisphantasy had led on to reﬂections of how awkward it is, when all is saidand done, for a physician to ask for medical treatment for himself fromhis professional colleagues. The Berlin eye-surgeon would not know me,and I should be able to pay his fees like anyone else. It was not until I hadrecalled this daydream that I realized that the recollection of a speciﬁcevent lay behind it. Shortly after Koller’s discovery, my father had in factbeen attacked by glaucoma; my friend Dr. Königstein, the ophthalmicsurgeon, had operated on him; while Dr. Koller had been in charge of thecocaine anaesthesia and had commented on the fact that this case hadbrought together all of the three men who had had a share in the intro-duction of cocaine.
My thoughts then went on to the occasion when I had last been re-
minded of this business of the cocaine. It had been a few days earlier,when I had been looking at a copy of a Festschrift in which grateful pupils
had celebrated the jubilee of their teacher and laboratory director. Amongthe laboratory’s claims to distinction which were enumerated in this bookI had seen a mention of the fact that Koller had made his discovery thereof the anaesthetic properties of cocaine. I then suddenly perceived thatmy dream was connected with an event of the previous evening. I hadwalked home precisely with Dr. Königstein and had got into conversationwith him about a matter which never fails to excite my feelings wheneverit is raised. While I was talking to him in the entrance-hall, ProfessorGärtner [Gardener] and his wife had joined us; and I could not help con-
gratulating them both on their blooming looks. But Professor Gärtner was
one of the authors of the Festschrift I have just mentioned, and may well
have reminded me of it. Moreover, the Frau L., whose disappointment on194 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [See footnote 1, p. 136.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 194her birthday I described earlier, was mentioned—though only, it is true,
in another connection—in my conversation with Dr. Königstein.
I will make an attempt at interpreting the other determinants of the
content of the dream as well. There was a dried specimen of the plant in-
cluded in the monograph, as though it had been a herbarium. This led
me to a memory from my secondary school. Our headmaster once calledtogether the boys from the higher forms and handed over the school’sherbarium to them to be looked through and cleaned. Some smallworms—bookworms—had found their way into it. He does not seem tohave had much conﬁdence in my helpfulness, for he handed me only afew sheets. These, as I could still recall, included some Crucifers. I neverhad a specially intimate contact with botany. In my preliminary exami-nation in botany I was also given a Crucifer to identify—and failed to doso. My prospects would not have been too bright, if I had not beenhelped out by my theoretical knowledge. I went on from the Cruciferaeto the Compositae. It occurred to me that artichokes were Compositae,and indeed I might fairly have called them my favourite ﬂowers. Being
more generous than I am, my wife often brought me back these favouriteﬂowers of mine from the market.
I saw the monograph which I had written lying before me. This again
led me back to something. I had had a letter from my friend [Fliess] inBerlin the day before in which he had shown his power of visualization:‘I am very much occupied with your dream-book. I see it lying ﬁnished be-fore me and I see myself turning over its pages. ’
1How much I envied him
his gift as a seer! If only Icould have seen it lying ﬁnished before me!
The folded coloured plate. While I was a medical student I was the con-
stant victim of an impulse only to learn things out of monographs. In spite
of my limited means, I succeeded in getting hold of a number of volumesof the proceedings of medical societies and was enthralled by their coloured
plates. I was proud of my hankering for thoroughness. When I myself had
begun to publish papers, I had been obliged to make my own drawings toillustrate them and I remembered that one of them had been so wretchedthat a friendly colleague had jeered at me over it. There followed, I couldnot quite make out how, a recollection from very early youth. It had onceamused my father to hand over a book with coloured plates (an account of195 A. Recent and Indifferent Material
1 [Freud’s reply to this letter from Fliess is dated March 10, 1898 (Freud, 1950 a,
Letter 84); so that the dream must have occurred not more than a day or two
earlier.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 195a journey through Persia) for me and my eldest sister to destroy. Not easy
to justify from the educational point of view! I had been ﬁve years old atthe time and my sister not yet three; and the picture of the two of us bliss-fully pulling the book to pieces (leaf by leaf, like an artichoke , I found my-
self saying) was almost the only plastic memory that I retained from thatperiod of my life. Then, when I became a student, I had developed a pas-sion for collecting and owning books, which was analogous to my likingfor learning out of monographs: a favourite hobby. (The idea of ‘favourite’
had already appeared in connection with cyclamens and artichokes.) I hadbecome a bookworm. I had always, from the time I ﬁrst began to think
about myself, referred this ﬁrst passion of mine back to the childhoodmemory I have mentioned. Or rather, I had recognized that the childhoodscene was a ‘screen memory’ for my later bibliophile propensities.
1And I
had early discovered, of course, that passions often lead to sorrow. WhenI was seventeen I had run up a largish account at the bookseller’s and hadnothing to meet it with; and my father had scarcely taken it as an excusethat my inclinations might have chosen a worse outlet. The recollection ofthis experience from the later years of my youth at once brought back tomy mind the conversation with my friend Dr. Königstein. For in thecourse of it we had discussed the same question of my being blamed forbeing too much absorbed in my favourite hobbies.
For reasons with which we are not concerned, I shall not pursue the in-
terpretation of this dream any further, but will merely indicate the direc-tion in which it lay. In the course of the work of analysis I was remindedof my conversation with Dr. Königstein, and I was brought to it frommore than one direction. When I take into account the topics touchedupon in that conversation, the meaning of the dream becomes intelligibleto me. All the trains of thought starting from the dream—the thoughtsabout my wife’s and my own favourite ﬂowers, about cocaine, about theawkwardness of medical treatment among colleagues, about my preferencefor studying monographs and about my neglect of certain branches of sci-ence such as botany—all of these trains of thought, when they were fur-ther pursued, led ultimately to one or other of the many ramiﬁcations ofmy conversation with Dr. Königstein. Once again the dream, like the onewe ﬁrst analysed—the dream of Irma’s injection—turns out to have beenin the nature of a self-justiﬁcation, a plea on behalf of my own rights. In-196 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 Cf. my paper on screen memories [Freud, 1899 a].9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 196deed, it carried the subject that was raised in the earlier dream a stage fur-
ther and discussed it with reference to fresh material that had arisen in theinterval between the two dreams. Even the apparently indifferent form inwhich the dream was couched turns out to have had signiﬁcance. What itmeant was: ‘After all, I’m the man who wrote the valuable and memorablepaper (on cocaine),’ just as in the earlier dream I had said on my behalf:‘I’m a conscientious and hard-working student.’ In both cases what I wasinsisting was: ‘I may allow myself to do this.’ There is, however, no needfor me to carry the interpretation of the dream any further, since my onlypurpose in reporting it was to illustrate by an example the relation betweenthe content of a dream and the experience of the previous day which pro-voked it. So long as I was aware only of the dream’s manifest content, it
appeared to be related only to a single event of the dream-day. But when
the analysis was carried out, a second source of the dream emerged in an-
other experience of the same day. The ﬁrst of these two impressions withwhich the dream was connected was an indifferent one, a subsidiary cir-cumstance: I had seen a book in a shop-window whose title attracted myattention for a moment but whose subject-matter could scarcely be of in-terest to me. The second experience had a high degree of psychical impor-tance: I had had a good hour’s lively conversation with my friend theeye-surgeon; in the course of it I had given him some information whichwas bound to affect both of us closely, and I had had memories stirred upin me which had drawn my attention to a great variety of internal stressesin my own mind. Moreover, the conversation had been interrupted beforeits conclusion because we had been joined by acquaintances.
We must now ask what was the relation of the two impressions of the
dream-day to each other and to the dream of the subsequent night. In themanifest content of the dream only the indifferent impression was alluded
to, which seems to conﬁrm the notion that dreams have a preference fortaking up unimportant details of waking life. All the strands of the inter-pretation, on the other hand, led to the important impression, to the one
which had justiﬁably stirred my feelings. If the sense of the dream isjudged, as it can only rightly be, by its latent content as revealed by theanalysis, a new and signiﬁcant fact is unexpectedly brought to light. Theconundrum of why dreams are concerned only with worthless fragmentsof waking life seems to have lost all its meaning; nor can it any longer bemaintained that waking life is not pursued further in dreams and thatdreams are thus psychical activity wasted upon foolish material. The con-trary is true: our dream-thoughts are dominated by the same material that197 A. Recent and Indifferent Material9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 197has occupied us during the day and we only bother to dream of things
which have given us cause for reﬂection in the daytime.
Why is it, then, that, though the occasion of my dreaming was a day-
time impression by which I had been justiﬁably stirred, I nevertheless actually dreamt of something indifferent? The most obvious explanation,no doubt, is that we are once more faced by one of the phenomena ofdream-distortion, which in my last chapter I traced to a psychical forceacting as a censorship. My recollection of the monograph on the genusCyclamen would thus serve the purpose of being an allusion to the con-
versation with my friend, just as the ‘smoked salmon’ in the dream of theabandoned supper-party [pp. 172 f.] served as an allusion to the dreamer’s
thought of her woman friend. The only question is as to the intermediatelinks which enabled the impression of the monograph to serve as an allu-sion to the conversation with the eye-surgeon, since at ﬁrst sight there isno obvious connection between them. In the example of the abandonedsupper-party the connection was given at once: ‘smoked salmon,’ beingthe friend’s favourite dish, was an immediate constituent of the group ofideas which were likely to be aroused in the dreamer’s mind by the per-sonality of her friend. In this later example there were two detached im-pressions which at a ﬁrst glance only had in common the fact of theirhaving occurred on the same day: I had caught sight of the monographin the morning and had had the conversation the same evening. Theanalysis enabled us to solve the problem as follows: connections of thiskind, when they are not present in the ﬁrst instance, are woven retrospec-tively between the ideational content of one impression and that of theother. I have already drawn attention to the intermediate links in thepresent case by the words I have italicized in my record of the analysis. Ifthere had been no inﬂuences from another quarter, the idea of the mono-graph on the Cyclamen would only, I imagine, have led to the idea of itsbeing my wife’s favourite ﬂower, and possibly also to Frau L.’s absentbouquet. I scarcely think that these background thoughts would have suf-ﬁced to evoke a dream. As we are told in Hamlet:
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the graveTo tell us this.
But, lo and behold, I was reminded in the analysis that the man who in-terrupted our conversation was called Gärtner [Gardener] and that I had
thought his wife looked blooming. And even as I write these words I recall198 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 198that one of my patients, who bore the charming name of Flora, was for a
time the pivot of our discussion. These must have been the intermediate
links, arising from the botanical group of ideas, which formed the bridgebetween the two experiences of that day, the indifferent and the stirringone. A further set of connections was then established—those surround-ing the idea of cocaine, which had every right to serve as a link betweenthe ﬁgure of Dr. Königstein and a botanical monograph which I hadwritten; and these connections strengthened the fusion between the twogroups of ideas so that it became possible for a portion of the one experience to serve as an allusion to the other one.
I am prepared to ﬁnd this explanation attacked on the ground of its
being arbitrary or artiﬁcial. What, it may be asked, would have happenedif Professor Gärtner and his wife with her blooming looks had not comeup to us or if the patient we were talking about had been called Anna in-stead of Flora? The answer is simple. If these chains of thought had beenabsent others would no doubt have been selected. It is easy enough toconstruct such chains, as is shown by the puns and riddles that peoplemake every day for their entertainment. The realm of jokes knows noboundaries. Or, to go a stage further, if there had been no possibility offorging enough intermediate links between the two impressions, thedream would simply have been different. Another indifferent impressionof the same day—for crowds of such impressions enter our minds and arethen forgotten—would have taken the place of the ‘monograph’ in thedream, would have linked up with the subject of the conversation andwould have represented it in the content of the dream. Since it was in factthe monograph and not any other idea that was chosen to serve this func-tion, we must suppose that it was the best adapted for the connection.There is no need for us to emulate Lessing’s Hänschen Schlau and feel as-tonished that ‘only the rich people own the most money.’
1
A psychological process by which, according to our account, indifferent
experiences take the place of psychically signiﬁcant ones, cannot fail toarouse suspicion and bewilderment. It will be our task in a later chapter[Chapter VI, Section B (pp. 322 ff.)] to make the peculiarities of this ap-parently irrational operation more intelligible. At this point we are only199 A. Recent and Indifferent Material
1 [From one of Lessing’s Sinngedichte (epigrams in verse). A further lengthy dis-
cussion of this dream will be found below (pp. 300 ff.).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 199concerned with the effects of a process whose reality I have been driven to
assume by innumerable and regularly recurrent observations made in
analysing dreams. What takes place would seem to be something in thenature of a ‘displacement’—of psychical emphasis, shall we say?—bymeans of intermediate links; in this way, ideas which originally had only aweak charge of intensity take over the charge from ideas which were origi-
nally intensely cathected
1and at last attain enough strength to enable them
to force an entry into consciousness. Displacements of this kind are nosurprise to us where it is a question of dealing with quantities of affect or
with motor activities in general. When a lonely old maid transfers her af-fection to animals, or a bachelor becomes an enthusiastic collector, whena soldier defends a scrap of coloured cloth—a ﬂag—with his life’s blood,when a few seconds’ extra pressure in a handshake means bliss to a lover,or when, in Othello, a lost handkerchief precipitates an outburst of rage—
all of these are instances of psychical displacements to which we raise noobjection. But when we hear that a decision as to what shall reach our consciousness and what shall be kept out of it—what we shall think, in
short—has been arrived at in the same manner and on the same principles,we have an impression of a pathological event and, if such things happenin waking life, we describe them as errors in thought. I will anticipate theconclusions to which we shall later be led, and suggest that the psychicalprocess which we have found at work in dream-displacement, though itcannot be described as a pathological disturbance, nevertheless differs fromthe normal and is to be regarded as a process of a more primary nature.
[See below, Chapter VII, Section E, pp. 585 ff.]
Thus the fact that the content of dreams includes remnants of trivial
experiences is to be explained as a manifestation of dream-distortion (bydisplacement); and it will be recalled that we came to the conclusion thatdream-distortion was the product of a censorship operating in the passage-way between two psychical agencies. It is to be expected that the analysisof a dream will regularly reveal its true, psychically signiﬁcant source inwaking life, though the emphasis has been displaced from the recollectionof that source on to that of an indifferent one. This explanation brings usinto complete conﬂict with Robert’s theory [pp. 105 ff.], which ceases tobe of any service to us. For the fact which Robert sets out to explain is anonexistent one. His acceptance of it rests on a misunderstanding, on his200 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Charged with psychical energy. See Editor’s Introduction, p. xvi f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 200failure to replace the apparent content of dreams by their realmeaning.
And there is another objection that can be raised to Robert’s theory. If it
were really the business of dreams to relieve our memory of the ‘dregs’ ofdaytime recollections by a special psychical activity, our sleep would bemore tormented and harder worked than our mental life while we areawake. For the number of indifferent impressions from which our mem-ory would need to be protected is clearly immensely large: the nightwould not be long enough to cope with such a mass. It is far more likelythat the process of forgetting indifferent impressions goes forward with-out the active intervention of our psychical forces.
Nevertheless we must not be in a hurry to take leave of Robert’s ideas
without further consideration. [See pp. 577 f.] We have still not explainedthe fact that one of the indifferent impressions of waking life, one, more-over, dating from the day preceding the dream, invariably contributes to-wards the dream’s content. The connections between this impression andthe true source of the dream in the unconscious are not always thereready-made; as we have seen, they may only be established retrospectively,in the course of the dream-work,
1with a view, as it were, to making the
intended displacement feasible. There must therefore be some compellingforce in the direction of establishing connections precisely with a recent,though indifferent, impression; and the latter must possess some attributewhich makes it especially suitable for this purpose. For if that were notso, it would be just as easy for the dream-thoughts to displace their em-phasis on to an unimportant component in their own circle of ideas.
The following observations may help us towards clearing up this point.
If in the course of a single day we have two or more experiences suitable forprovoking a dream, the dream will make a combined reference to them asa single whole; it is under a necessity to combine them into a unity. Here is an
instance. One afternoon during the summer I entered a railway compart-ment in which I found two acquaintances who were strangers to each other.One of them was an eminent medical colleague and the other was a mem-ber of a distinguished family with which I had professional relations. I in-troduced the two gentlemen to each other, but all through the long journeythey conducted their conversation with me as a go-between, so that Ipresently found myself discussing various topics alternately, ﬁrst with the201 A. Recent and Indifferent Material
1 [This is the ﬁrst mention of the fundamentally important concept to which the
whole of the sixth and longest chapter of the book is devoted.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 201one and then with the other. I asked my doctor friend to use his inﬂuence
on behalf of a common acquaintance of ours who was just starting a med-ical practice. The doctor replied that he was convinced of the young man’scapacity, but that his homely appearance would make it hard for him tomake his way in families of the better class; to which I replied that that wasthe very reason why he needed inﬂuential assistance. T urning to my otherfellow-traveller, I enquired after the health of his aunt—the mother of oneof my patients—who was lying seriously ill at the time. During the nightfollowing the journey I had a dream that the young friend on whose behalfI had pleaded was sitting in a fashionable drawing room in a select com-pany composed of all the distinguished and wealthy people of my acquain-tance and, with the easy bearing of a man of the world, was delivering afuneral oration on the old lady (who was already dead so far as my dreamwas concerned), the aunt of my second fellow-traveller. (I must confess thatI had not been on good terms with that lady.) Thus my dream had, onceagain, worked out connections between the two sets of impressions of theprevious day and had combined them into a single situation.
Many experiences such as this lead me to assert that the dream-work
is under some kind of necessity to combine all the sources which haveacted as stimuli for the dream into a single unity in the dream itself.
1
I will now proceed to the question of whether the instigating source
of a dream, revealed by analysis, must invariably be a recent (and signiﬁ-cant) event or whether an internal experience, that is, the recollection of a
psychically important event—a train of thought—can assume the rôle ofa dream-instigator. The answer, based upon a large number of analyses,is most deﬁnitely in favour of the latter alternative. A dream can be insti-gated by an internal process which has, as it were, become a recent event,owing to thought-activity during the previous day.202 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 The tendency of the dream-work to fuse into a single action all events of interest
which occur simultaneously has already been remarked on by several writers; e.g.
Delage (1891, 41) and Delboeuf (1885, 237), who speaks of ‘ rapprochement
forcé’ [‘enforced convergence’]. [Freud himself had stated this principle in the
passage in Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and Freud, 1895) quoted in the Editor’s
Introduction (p. xiv).—At this point the following sentence was added in 1909and included in every edition up to that of 1922, after which it was omitted: ‘Ina later chapter (on the dream-work) we shall come across this compelling im-pulse towards combining as an instance of “condensation”—another kind of pri-mary psychical process.’ (Cf. pp. 248 and 296 ff.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 202This seems to be the appropriate moment for tabulating the different
conditions to which we ﬁnd that the sources of dreams are subject. The
source of a dream may be either—
(a) a recent and psychically signiﬁcant experience which is repre-
sented in the dream directly,1or
(b) several recent and signiﬁcant experiences which are combined into
a single unity by the dream,2or
(c) one or more recent and signiﬁcant experiences which are repre-
sented in the content of the dream by a mention of a contemporary butindifferent experience,
3or
(d) an internal signiﬁcant experience (e.g. a memory or a train of
thought), which is in that case invariably represented in the dream by a
mention of a recent but indifferent impression.4
It will be seen that in interpreting dreams we ﬁnd one condition al-
ways fulﬁlled: one component of the content of the dream is a repetitionof a recent impression of the previous day. This impression that is to berepresented in the dream may either itself belong to the circle of ideas sur-rounding the actual instigator of the dream—whether as an essential oras a trivial portion of it—or it may be derived from the ﬁeld of an indif-ferent impression which has been brought into connection with the ideassurrounding the dream-instigator by more or less numerous links. Theapparent multiplicity of governing conditions is in fact merely dependentupon the two alternatives of whether a displacement has or has not takenplace; and it is worth pointing out that we are enabled by these alterna-tives to explain the range of contrast between different dreams just as eas-ily as the medical theory is enabled to do by its hypothesis of brain cellsranging from partial to total wakefulness. (See above, pp. 107 ff.)
It will further be observed, if we consider these four possible cases, that
a psychical element which is signiﬁcant but not recent (e.g. a train ofthought or a memory) can be replaced, for the purpose of forming adream, by an element which is recent but indifferent, provided only thattwo conditions are fulﬁlled: (1) the content of the dream must be con-nected with a recent experience, and (2) the instigator of the dream must203 A. Recent and Indifferent Material
1 As in the dream of Irma’s injection [pp. 131 ff.] and in the dream of my uncle
with the yellow beard [pp. 163 ff.].
2 As in the young doctor’s funeral oration [pp. 201 f.].
3 As in the dream of the botanical monograph [pp. 193 ff.].
4 Most of my patients’ dreams during analysis are of this kind.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 203remain a psychically signiﬁcant process. Only in one case—case ( a)—are
both of these conditions fulﬁlled by one and the same impression. It is to
be noticed, moreover, that indifferent impressions which are capable ofbeing used for constructing a dream so long as they are recent lose thatcapacity as soon as they are a day (or at the most a few days) older. Fromthis we must conclude that the freshness of an impression gives it somekind of psychical value for purposes of dream-construction equivalent insome way to the value of emotionally coloured memories or trains ofthought. The basis of the value which thus attaches to recent impressionsin connection with the construction of dreams will only become evidentin the course of our subsequent psychological discussions.
1
In this connection it will be noticed, incidentally, that modiﬁcations
in our mnemic and ideational material may take place during the nightunobserved by our consciousness. We are often advised that before com-ing to a ﬁnal decision on some subject we should ‘sleep on it,’ and thisadvice is evidently justiﬁed. But here we have passed from the psychologyof dreams to that of sleep, and this is not the last occasion on which weshall be tempted to do so.
2204 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 See the passage on ‘transference’ in Chapter VII [pp. 562 ff.].
2 [Footnote added 1919:] An important contribution to the part played by recent
material in the construction of dreams has been made by Pötzl (1917) in a paper
which carries a wealth of implications. In a series of experiments Pötzl requiredthe subjects to make a drawing of what they had consciously noted of a pictureexposed to their view in a tachistoscope [an instrument for exposing an objectto view for an extremely short time]. He then turned his attention to the dreamsdreamt by the subjects during the following night and required them once moreto make drawings of appropriate portions of these dreams. It was shown unmis-takably that those details of the exposed picture which had not been noted bythe subject provided material for the construction of the dream, whereas thosedetails which had been consciously perceived and recorded in the drawing madeafter the exposure did not recur in the manifest content of the dream. The ma-terial that was taken over by the dream-work was modiﬁed by it for the purposesof dream-construction in its familiar ‘arbitrary’ (or, more properly, ‘autocratic’)manner. The questions raised by Pötzl’s experiment go far beyond the sphere ofdream-interpretation as dealt with in the present volume. In passing, it is worthremarking on the contrast between this new method of studying the formationof dreams experimentally and the earlier, crude technique for introducing intothe dream stimuli which interrupted the subject’s sleep. [Cf. p. 243 n.2.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 204An objection, however, may be raised which threatens to upset these
last conclusions. If indifferent impressions can only ﬁnd their way into a
dream provided they are recent, how does it happen that the content ofdreams also includes elements from an earlier period of life which at thetime when they were recent possessed, to use Strümpell’s words [1877,40 f.], no psychical value, and should therefore have been long since forgotten—elements, that is to say, which are neither fresh nor psychicallysigniﬁcant?
This objection can be completely dealt with by a reference to the ﬁnd-
ings of the psycho-analysis of neurotics. The explanation is that the dis-placement which replaces psychically important by indifferent material(alike in dreaming and in thinking) has in these cases already taken placeat the early period of life in question and since then become ﬁxed in thememory. These particular elements which were originally indifferent areindifferent no longer, since taking over (by means of displacement) thevalue of psychically signiﬁcant material. Nothing that has really remained
indifferent can be reproduced in a dream.
The reader will rightly conclude from the foregoing arguments that I
am asserting that there are no indifferent dream-instigators—and conse-quently no ‘innocent’ dreams. Those are, in the strictest and most ab-solute sense, my opinions—if I leave on one side the dreams of childrenand perhaps brief reactions in dreams to sensations felt during the night.Apart from this, what we dream is either manifestly recognizable as psy-chically signiﬁcant, or it is distorted and cannot be judged till the dreamhas been interpreted, after which it will once more be found to be signiﬁ-cant. Dreams are never concerned with trivialities; we do not allow oursleep to be disturbed by triﬂes.
1The apparently innocent dreams turn out
to be quite the reverse when we take the trouble to analyse them. Theyare, if I may say so, wolves in sheep’s clothing. Since this is another pointupon which I may expect to be contradicted, and since I am glad of anopportunity of showing dream-distortion at work, I will select a numberof ‘innocent’ dreams from my records and submit them to analysis.205 A. Recent and Indifferent Material
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Havelock Ellis, a friendly critic of this book, writes (1911,
166): ‘This is the point at which many of us are no longer able to follow Freud.’
Havelock Ellis has not, however, carried out any analyses of dreams and refusesto believe how impossible it is to base one’s judgement on their manifest content.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 205i
An intelligent and cultivated young woman, reserved and undemon-
strative in her behaviour, reported as follows: I dreamt that I arrived too
late at the market and could get nothing either from the butcher or from thewoman who sells vegetables. An innocent dream, no doubt; but dreams arenot as simple as that, so I asked to be told it in greater detail. She there-upon gave me the following account. She dreamt she was going to the mar-
ket with her cook, who was carrying the basket. After she had asked forsomething, the butcher said to her: ‘That’s not obtainable any longer,’ and of-fered her something else, adding, ‘This is good too.’ She rejected it and wenton to the woman who sells vegetables, who tried to get her to buy a peculiarvegetable that was tied up in bundles but was of a black colour. She said: ‘Idon’t recognize that; I won’t take it .’
The dream’s connection with the previous day was quite straightfor-
ward. She had actually gone to the market too late and had got nothing.The situation seemed to shape itself into the phrase ‘Die Fleischbank warschon geschlossen [‘the meat-shop was closed’]. I pulled myself up: was not
that, or rather its opposite, a vulgar description of a certain sort of sloven-liness in a man’s dress?
1However, the dreamer herself did not use the
phrase; she may perhaps have avoided using it. Let us endeavour, then, toarrive at an interpretation of the details of the dream.
When anything in a dream has the character of direct speech, that is to
say, when it is said or heard and not merely thought (and it is easy as a ruleto make the distinction with certainty), then it is derived from somethingactually spoken in waking life—though, to be sure, this something ismerely treated as raw material and may be cut up and slightly altered and,more especially, divorced from its context.
2In carrying out an interpreta-
tion, one method is to start from spoken phrases of this kind. What, then,was the origin of the butcher’s remark ‘ That’s not obtainable any longer’ ?
The answer was that it came from me myself. A few days earlier I had ex-206 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [‘Du hast deine Fleischbank offen ’ (‘your meat-shop’s open’): Viennese slang for
‘your ﬂy is undone.’]
2 See my discussion of speeches in dreams in my chapter on the dream-work [pp.
427 ff.]. Only one writer on the subject seems to have recognized the source of
spoken phrases occurring in dreams, namely Delboeuf (1885, 226), who com-pares them to clichés. [This dream is brieﬂy recorded in Section VII of Freud’sshort essay On Dreams (1901a); Standard Ed., 5, 668.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 206plained to the patient that the earliest experiences of childhood were ‘ not
obtainable any longer as such,’ but were replaced in analysis by ‘transfer-
ences’ and dreams.1So I was the butcher and she was rejecting these trans-
ferences into the present of old habits of thinking and feeling.—What,
again, was the origin of her own remark in the dream ‘ I don’t recognize
that; I won’t take it’? For the purposes of the analysis this had to be dividedup. ‘I don’t recognize that ’ was something she had said the day before to her
cook, with whom she had had a dispute; but at the time she had gone on:‘Behave yourself properly! ’ At this point there had clearly been a displace-
ment. Of the two phrases that she had used in the dispute with her cook,she had chosen the insigniﬁcant one for inclusion in the dream. But it wasonly the suppressed one, ‘ Behave yourself properly! ’ that ﬁtted in with the
rest of the content of the dream: those would have been the appropriatewords to use if someone had ventured to make improper suggestions andhad forgotten ‘to close his meat-shop.’ The allusions underlying the inci-dent with the vegetable-seller were a further conﬁrmation that our inter-pretation was on the right track. A vegetable that is sold tied up in bundles(lengthways, as the patient added afterwards) and is also black, could onlybe a dream-combination of asparagus and black (Spanish) radishes. Noknowledgeable person of either sex will ask for an interpretation of aspara-gus. But the other vegetable —‘Schwarzer Rettig’ [‘black radish’]—can be
taken as an exclamation—‘ Schwarzer, rett’ dich! ’ [‘Blacky! Be off!’]—
2, and
accordingly it too seems to hint at the same sexual topic which we sus-pected at the very beginning, when we felt inclined to introduce the phraseabout the meat-shop being closed into the original account of the dream.We need not enquire now into the full meaning of the dream. So much isquite clear: it hada meaning and that meaning was far from innocent.
3207 A. Recent and Indifferent Material
1 [This passage is referred to in a footnote to a discussion of childhood memories
in Section V of Freud’s case history of the ‘Wolf Man’ (1918 b).]
2 [It seems probable that this is a reminiscence of a picture puzzle or rebus of the
kind so common in the pages of Fliegende Blätter and similar comic papers.]
3 If anyone is curious to know, I may add that the dream concealed a phantasy of
my behaving in an improper and sexually provocative manner, and of the patient
putting up a defence against my conduct. If this interpretation seems incredible,I need only point to the numerous instances in which doctors have charges of thesame kind brought against them by hysterical women. But in such cases thephantasy emerges into consciousness undisguised and in the form of a delusion,instead of being distorted and appearing only as a dream.—[ Added 1909:] This
dream occurred at the beginning of the patient’s psycho-analytic treatment. It was9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 207ii
Here is another innocent dream, dreamt by the same patient, and in a
sense a counterpart to the last one. Her husband asked her: ‘Don’t you think
we ought to have the piano tuned? ’And she replied: ‘It’s not worth while; the
hammers need reconditioning in any case. ’
Once again this was a repetition of a real event of the previous day. Her
husband had asked this question and she had made some such reply. But
what was the explanation of her dreaming it? She told me that the piano wasa disgusting old box, that it made an ugly noise, that it had been in her hus-
band’s possession before their marriage,
1and so on. But the key to the solu-
tion was only given by her words: ‘ It’s not worth while.’ These were derived
from a visit she had paid the day before to a woman friend. She had been in-vited to take off her jacket, but had refused with the words: ‘Thank you, butit’s not worth while ; I can only stop a minute.’ As she was telling me this, I
recollected that during the previous day’s analysis she had suddenly caughthold of her jacket, one of the buttons having come undone. Thus it was asthough she were saying: ‘Please don’t look; it’s not worth while. ’ In the same
way ‘box’ [‘Kasten ’] was a substitute for a ‘chest’ [‘Brustkasten’]; and the inter-
pretation of the dream led us back at once to the time of her physical devel-opment at puberty, when she had begun to be dissatisﬁed by her ﬁgure. Wecan hardly doubt that it led back to still earlier times, if we take the word ‘ dis-
gusting’ into account and the ‘ ugly noise,’ and if we remember how often—
both in doubles entendres and in dreams—the lesser hemispheres of a woman’s
body are used, whether as contrasts or as substitutes, for the larger ones.
iii
I will interrupt this series for a moment and insert a short innocent
dream produced by a young man. He dreamt that he was putting on his win-
ter overcoat once more, which was a dreadful thing. The ostensible reason for208 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
not until later that I learnt that she had been repeating in it the initial trauma
from which her neurosis had arisen. I have since then come across the same be-haviour in other patients; having been exposed to a sexual assault in their child-hood, they seek, as it were, to bring about a repetition of it in their dreams.
1 This last was a substitute for the opposite idea, as the course of the analysis will
make clear.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 208this dream was a sudden return of cold weather. If we look more closely,
however, we shall notice that the two short pieces that make up the dreamare not in complete harmony. For what could there be ‘dreadful’ about put-ting on a heavy or thick overcoat in cold weather? Moreover, the innocenceof the dream was decidedly upset by the ﬁrst association that occurred tothe dreamer in the analysis. He recalled that a lady conﬁded to him the daybefore that her youngest child owed its existence to a torn condom. On thatbasis he was able to reconstruct his thoughts. A thin condom was danger-ous, but a thick one was bad. The condom was suitably represented as anovercoat, since one slips into both of them. But an occurrence such as thelady described to him would certainly be ‘dreadful’ for an unmarried man.
And now let us return, to our innocent lady dreamer.
iv
She was putting a candle into a candlestick; but the candle broke so that
it wouldn’t stand up properly. The girls at her school said she was clumsy; butthe mistress said it was not her fault .
Yet again the occasion for the dream was a real event. The day before she
had actually put a candle into a candlestick, though it did not break. Sometransparent symbolism was being used in this dream. A candle is an objectwhich can excite the female genitals; and, if it is broken, so that it cannotstand up properly, it means that the man is impotent. (‘ It was not her fault. ’ )
But could a carefully brought-up young woman, who had been screenedfrom the impact of anything ugly, have known that a candle might be putto such a use? As it happened, she was able to indicate how it was that sheobtained this piece of knowledge. Once when they were in a rowing boaton the Rhine, another boat had passed them with some students in it. Theywere in high spirits and were singing, or rather shouting, a song:
Wenn die Königin von Schweden,Bei geschlossenen FensterlädenMit Apollokerzen . . .
1209 A. Recent and Indifferent Material
1 [‘When the Queen of Sweden, behind closed shutters, . . . with Apollo candles.’
‘Apollo candles’ was the trade name of a familiar brand of candles. This is an ex-
tract from a well-known students’ song, which has innumerable similar stanzas.The missing word is ‘ onaniert ’ (‘masturbates’).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 209She either failed to hear or did not understand the last word and had to
get her husband to give her the necessary explanation. The verse was re-placed in the content of the dream by an innocent recollection of somejob she had done clumsily when she was at school, and the replacementwas made possible owing to the common element of closed shutters. The
connection between the topics of masturbation and impotence is obviousenough. The ‘Apollo’ in the latent content of this dream linked it withan earlier one in which the virgin Pallas ﬁgured. Altogether far from innocent.
v
In order that we may not be tempted to draw conclusions too easily
from dreams as to the dreamer’s actual life, I will add one more dream ofthe same patient’s, which once more has an innocent appearance. ‘ I
dreamt ,’ she said, ‘of what I really did yesterday: I ﬁlled a small trunk so full
of books that I had difﬁculty in shutting it and I dreamt just what really hap-pened. ’ In this instance the narrator herself laid the chief emphasis on the
agreement between the dream and reality. [Cf. pp. 54 n. 2 and 384.] All
such judgements on a dream and comments upon it, though they havemade themselves a place in waking thought, invariably form in fact partof the latent content of the dream, as we shall ﬁnd conﬁrmed by other ex-amples later on [pp. 453 ff.]. What we were being told, then, was thatwhat the dream described had really happened the day before. It wouldtake up too much space to explain how it was that the idea occurred tome of making use of the English language in the interpretation. It isenough to say that once again what was in question was a little ‘box’ (cf.the dream of the dead child in the ‘case,’ pp. 177 f.) which was so full thatnothing more could get into it. Anyhow nothing bad this time.
In all of these ‘innocent’ dreams the motive for the censorship is obvi-
ously the sexual factor. This, however, is a subject of prime importancewhich I must leave on one side.210 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 210(B)
INFANTILE MATERIAL AS A SOURCE OF DREAMS
Like every other writer on the subject, with the exception of Robert, I
have pointed out as a third peculiarity of the content of dreams that it
may include impressions which date back to earliest childhood, andwhich seem not to be accessible to waking memory. It is naturally hard todetermine how rarely or how frequently this occurs, since the origin ofthe dream-elements in question is not recognized after waking. Proof thatwhat we are dealing with are impressions from childhood must thereforebe established by external evidence and there is seldom an opportunityfor doing this. A particularly convincing example is that given by Maury[1878, 143 f., quoted on p. 49 above] of the man who determined oneday to revisit his old home after an absence of more than twenty years.During the night before his departure he dreamt that he was in a totallyunknown place and there met an unknown man in the street and had aconversation with him. When he reached his home, he found that theunknown place was a real one in the immediate neighbourhood of his na-tive town, and the unknown man in the dream turned out to be a friendof his dead father’s who was still living there. This was conclusive evi-dence that he had seen both the man and the place in his childhood. Thisdream is also to be interpreted as a dream of impatience like that of thegirl with the concert-ticket in her pocket (pp. 176 ff.), that of the childwhose father had promised to take her on an excursion to the Hameau(cf. pp. 153 f.), and similar ones. The motives which led the dreamers toreproduce one particular impression from their childhood rather than anyother cannot, of course, be discovered without an analysis.
Someone who attended a course of lectures of mine and boasted that
his dreams very seldom underwent distortion reported to me that not longbefore he had dreamt of seeing his former tutor in bed with the nurse who
had been with his family till his eleventh year. In the dream he had identi-ﬁed the locality where the scene occurred. His interest had been arousedand he had reported the dream to his elder brother, who had laughinglyconﬁrmed the truth of what he had dreamt. His brother remembered itvery well, as he had been six years old at the time. The lovers had been in211 B. Infantile Material9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 211the habit of making the elder boy drunk with beer, whenever circum-
stances were favourable for intercourse during the night. The youngerboy—the dreamer—who was then three years old and slept in the roomwith the nurse, was not regarded as an impediment. [See also p. 231.]
There is another way in which it can be established with certainty
without the assistance of interpretation that a dream contains elementsfrom childhood. This is where the dream is of what has been called the‘recurrent’ type: that is to say, where a dream was ﬁrst dreamt in child-hood and then constantly reappears from time to time during adultsleep.
1I am able to add to the familiar examples of such dreams a few
from my own records, though I have never myself experienced one. Aphysician in his thirties told me that from the earliest days of his child-hood to the present time a yellow lion frequently appeared in his dreams;he was able to give a minute description of it. This lion out of his dreamsmade its appearance one day in bodily form, as a china ornament thathad long disappeared. The young man then learnt from his mother thatthis object had been his favourite toy during his early childhood, thoughhe himself had forgotten the fact.
2
If we turn now from the manifest content of dreams to the dream-
thoughts which only analysis uncovers, we ﬁnd to our astonishment thatexperiences from childhood also play a part in dreams whose contentwould never have led one to suppose it. I owe a particularly agreeable andinstructive example of a dream of this kind to my respected colleague of212 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [See above, p. 73 n.Some remarks on ‘recurrent’ dreams will be found in Freud’s
‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ (1905 e), at the end of the syn-
thesis of Dora’s ﬁrst dream (Section II). Cf. below, p. 577 n.]
2 [The following further dream appeared at this point in the ﬁrst edition (1900)
only. A note in Ges. Schriften , 3(1925), 38, remarks that it was rightly omitted
in all subsequent editions: ‘Dreams of this sort are of a typical character and cor-
respond not to memories but to phantasies, whose meaning it is not hard to
guess.’ Here are the cancelled sentences: ‘One of my women patients dreamt thesame dream—a scene ﬁlled with anxiety—four or ﬁve times during her thirty-eighth year. She was being pursued, ﬂed into a room, shut the door, and thenopened it again to take out the key, which was on the outside of the door. Shehad a feeling that if she failed something frightful would happen. She got holdof the key, locked the door from the inside and gave a sigh of relief. I cannot sayto what age we should assign this little scene, in which, of course, she had onlyplayed the part of an audience.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 212the yellow lion. After reading Nansen’s narrative of his polar expedition,
he had a dream of being in a ﬁeld of ice and of giving the gallant explorergalvanic treatment for an attack of sciatica from which he was suffering.In the course of analysing the dream, he thought of a story dating fromhis childhood, which alone, incidentally, made the dream intelligible.One day, when he was a child of three or four, he had heard the grown-ups talking of voyages of discovery and had asked his father whether thatwas a serious illness. He had evidently confused ‘ Reisen ’ [‘voyages’] with
‘Reissen ’ [‘gripes’], and his brothers and sisters saw to it that he never for-
got this embarrassing mistake.
There was a similar instance of this when, in the course of my analysis of
the dream of the monograph on the genus Cyclamen [see above p. 195 f.],I stumbled upon the childhood memory of my father, when I was a boyof ﬁve, giving me a book illustrated with coloured plates to destroy. It mayperhaps be doubted whether this memory really had any share in deter-mining the form taken by the content of the dream or whether it was notrather that the process of analysis built up the connection subsequently.But the copious and intertwined associative links warrant our acceptingthe former alternative: cyclamen—favourite ﬂower—favourite food— artichokes; pulling to pieces like an artichoke, leaf by leaf (a phrase con-stantly ringing in our ears in relation to the piecemeal dismemberment ofthe Chinese Empire)—herbarium—bookworms, whose favourite food isbooks. Moreover I can assure my readers that the ultimate meaning of thedream, which I have not disclosed, is intimately related to the subject ofthe childhood scene.
In the case of another group of dreams, analysis shows us that the ac-
tual wish which instigated the dream, and the fulﬁlment of which is rep-resented by the dream, is derived from childhood; so that, to our surprise,we ﬁnd the child and the child’s impulses still living on in the dream.
At this point I shall once more take up the interpretation of a dream
which we have already found instructive—the dream of my friend R. beingmy uncle. [See pp. 162 ff.] We have followed its interpretation to the pointof recognizing clearly as one of its motives my wish to be appointed to aprofessorship; and we explained the affection I felt in the dream for myfriend R. as a product of opposition and revolt against the slanders uponmy two colleagues which were contained in the dream-thoughts. Thedream was one of my own; I may therefore continue its analysis by sayingthat my feelings were not yet satisﬁed by the solution that had so far been213 B. Infantile Material9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 213reached. I knew that my waking judgement upon the colleagues who were
so ill-used in the dream-thoughts would have been a very different one; andthe force of my wish not to share their fate in the matter of the appoint-ment struck me as insufﬁcient to explain the contradiction between mywaking and dreaming estimates of them. If it was indeed true that my crav-ing to be addressed with a different tide was as strong as all that, it showeda pathological ambition which I did not recognize in myself and which Ibelieved was alien to me. I could not tell how other people who believedthey knew me would judge me in this respect. It might be that I was reallyambitious; but, if so, my ambition had long ago been transferred to objectsquite other than the title and rank of professor extraordinarius.
What, then, could have been the origin of the ambitiousness which
produced the dream in me? At that point I recalled an anecdote I had oftenheard repeated in my childhood. At the time of my birth an old peasant-woman had prophesied to my proud mother that with her ﬁrst-born childshe had brought a great man into the world. Prophecies of this kind mustbe very common: there are so many mothers ﬁlled with happy expecta-tions and so many old peasant-women and others of the kind who makeup for the loss of their power to control things in the present world byconcentrating it on the future. Nor can the prophetess have lost anythingby her words. Could this have been the source of my thirst for grandeur?But that reminded me of another experience, dating from my later child-hood, which provided a still better explanation. My parents had been inthe habit, when I was a boy of eleven or twelve, of taking me with them tothe Prater.
1One evening, while we were sitting in a restaurant there, our
attention had been attracted by a man who was moving from one table toanother and, for a small consideration, improvising a verse upon any topicpresented to him. I was despatched to bring the poet to our table and heshowed his gratitude to the messenger. Before enquiring what the chosentopic was to be, he had dedicated a few lines to myself; and he had beeninspired to declare that I should probably grow up to be a Cabinet Minis-ter. I still remembered quite well what an impression this second prophecyhad made on me. Those were the days of the ‘ Bürger’ Ministry.
2Shortly
before, my father had brought home portraits of these middle-class profes-214 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [The famous park on the outskirts of Vienna.]
2 [The ‘Middle-class Ministry’—a government of liberal complexion, elected after
the new Austrian constitution was established in 1867.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 214sional men—Herbst, Giskra, Unger, Berger and the rest—and we had il-
luminated the house in their honour. There had even been some Jewsamong them. So henceforth every industrious Jewish schoolboy carried aCabinet Minister’s portfolio in his satchel. The events of that period nodoubt had some bearing on the fact that up to a time shortly before I en-tered the University it had been my intention to study Law; it was only atthe last moment that I changed my mind. A ministerial career is deﬁnitelybarred to a medical man. But now to return to my dream. It began todawn on me that my dream had carried me back from the dreary presentto the cheerful hopes of the days of the ‘ Bürger’ Ministry, and that the wish
that it had done its best to fulﬁl was one dating back to those times. Inmishandling my two learned and eminent colleagues because they wereJews, and in treating the one as a simpleton and the other as a criminal, Iwas behaving as though I were the Minister, I had put myself in the Min-ister’s place. T urning the tables on His Excellency with a vengeance! Hehad refused to appoint me professor extraordinarius and I had retaliated in
the dream by stepping into his shoes.
1
In another instance it became apparent that, though the wish which
instigated the dream was a present-day one, it had received a powerful re-inforcement from memories that stretched far back into childhood. WhatI have in mind is a series of dreams which are based upon a longing tovisit Rome. For a long time to come, no doubt, I shall have to continueto satisfy that longing in my dreams: for at the season of the year when itis possible for me to travel, residence in Rome must be avoided for rea-sons of health.
2For instance, I dreamt once that I was looking out of a
railway-carriage window at the Tiber and the Ponte Sant’ Angelo. Thetrain began to move off, and it occurred to me that I had not so much asset foot in the city. The view that I had seen in my dream was taken from215 B. Infantile Material
1 [In an amusing letter to Fliess of March 11, 1902 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 152),
Freud tells the story of how he came actually to be appointed to a professorship,
two years after the publication of this book.]
2 [Footnote added 1909:] I discovered long since that it only needs a little courage
to fulﬁl wishes which till then have been regarded as unattainable; [ added 1925:]
and thereafter became a constant pilgrim to Rome. [The correspondence withFliess (Freud, 1950 a) gives repeated evidence of the emotional importance to
Freud of the idea of visiting Rome. He ﬁrst fulﬁlled this wish in the summer of1901 (Letter 146).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 215a well-known engraving which I had caught sight of for a moment the
day before in the sitting-room of one of my patients. Another time some-one led me to the top of a hill and showed me Rome half-shrouded inmist; it was so far away that I was surprised at my view of it being so clear.There was more in the content of this dream than I feel prepared to de-tail; but the theme of ‘the promised land seen from afar’ was obvious init. The town which I saw in this way for the ﬁrst time, shrouded in mist,was—Lübeck, and the prototype of the hill was—at Gleichenberg.
1In a
third dream I had at last got to Rome, as the dream itself informed me;but I was disappointed to ﬁnd that the scenery was far from being of anurban character. There was a narrow stream of dark water; on one side of it
were black cliffs and on the other meadows with big white ﬂowers. I noticeda Herr Zucker (whom I knew slightly) and determined to ask him the way
to the city. I was clearly making a vain attempt to see in my dream a city
which I had never seen in my waking life. Breaking up the landscape inthe dream into its elements, I found that the white ﬂowers took me toRavenna, which I have visited and which, for a time at least, supersededRome as capital of Italy. In the marshes round Ravenna we found theloveliest water-lilies growing in black water. Because we had had such dif-ﬁculty in picking them out of the water, the dream made them grow inmeadows like the narcissi at our own Aussee. The dark cliff, so close tothe water, reminded me vividly of the valley of the Tepl near Karlsbad.‘Karlsbad ’ enabled me to explain the curious detail of my having asked
Herr Zucker the way. The material out of which the dream was wovenincluded at this point two of those facetious Jewish anecdotes which con-tain so much profound and often bitter worldly wisdom and which we sogreatly enjoy quoting in our talk and letters.
2Here is the ﬁrst one: the
‘constitution ’ story. An impecunious Jew had stowed himself away without
a ticket in the fast train to Karlsbad. He was caught, and each time tickets
were inspected he was taken out of the train and treated more and moreseverely. At one of the stations on his via dolorosa he met an acquaintance,
who asked him where he was travelling to. ‘To Karlsbad,’ was his reply, ‘if216 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [An Austrian spa in Styria, not far from Graz.]
2 [In a letter to Fliess of June 12, 1897 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 65), Freud mentions
that he is making a collection of these anecdotes, of which he was to make great
use in his book on jokes (Freud, 1905 c). The ﬁrst of the present anecdotes is al-
luded to more than once in his letters, and Rome and Karlsbad come to be iden-tiﬁed as symbols of unattainable aims (e.g. in Letters 112 and 130).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 216my constitution can stand it.’ My memory then passed on to another
story: of a Jew who could not speak French and had been recommendedwhen he was in Paris to ask the way to the rue Richelieu. Paris itself hadfor many long years been another goal of my longings; and the blissfulfeelings with which I ﬁrst set foot on its pavement seemed to me a guar-antee that others of my wishes would be fulﬁlled as well. ‘Asking the way,’moreover, was a direct allusion to Rome , since it is well known that all
roads lead there. Again, the name Zucker [sugar] was once more an allu-
sion to Karlsbad ; for we are in the habit of prescribing treatment there for
anyone suffering from the constitutional complaint of diabetes.
1The in-
stigation to this dream had been a proposal made by my friend in Berlinthat we should meet in Prague at Easter. What we were going to discussthere would have included something with a further connection with‘sugar’ and ‘diabetes.’
A fourth dream, which occurred soon after the last one, took me to
Rome once more. I saw a street-corner before me and was surprised toﬁnd so many posters in German stuck up there.
2I had written to my
friend with prophetic foresight the day before to say that I thoughtPrague might not be an agreeable place for a German to walk about in.Thus the dream expressed at the same time a wish to meet him in Romeinstead of in a Bohemian town, and a desire, probably dating back to mystudent days, that the German language might be better tolerated inPrague. Incidentally, I must have understood Czech in my earliest child-hood, for I was born in a small town in Moravia which has a Slav popu-lation. A Czech nursery rhyme, which I heard in my seventeenth year,printed itself on my memory so easily that I can repeat it to this day,though I have no notion what it means. Thus there was no lack of con-nections with my early childhood in these dreams either.
It was on my last journey to Italy, which, among other places, took me
past Lake T rasimene, that ﬁnally—after having seen the Tiber and sadlyturned back when I was only ﬁfty miles from Rome—I discovered theway in which my longing for the eternal city had been reinforced by im-pressions from my youth. I was in the act of making a plan to by-passRome next year and travel to Naples, when a sentence occurred to me217 B. Infantile Material
1 [The German word for ‘diabetes’ is ‘ Zuckerkrankheit ’ (‘sugar-disease’).]
2 [This dream is discussed in a letter to Fliess of December 3, 1897 (Freud, 1950 a,
Letter 77). The meeting in Prague was probably in the early part of the same
year (see Letter 58, of February 8, 1897).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 217which I must have read in one of our classical authors:1‘Which of the two,
it may be debated, walked up and down his study with the greater impa-
tience after he had formed his plan of going to Rome—Winckelmann, theVice-Principal, or Hannibal, the Commander-in-Chief?’ I had actuallybeen following in Hannibal’s footsteps. Like him, I had been fated not tosee Rome; and he too had moved into the Campagna when everyone hadexpected him in Rome. But Hannibal, whom I had come to resemble inthese respects, had been the favourite hero of my later school days. Like somany boys of that age, I had sympathized in the Punic Wars not with theRomans but with the Carthaginians. And when, in the higher classes I be-gan to understand for the ﬁrst time what it meant to belong to an alienrace, and anti-semitic feelings among the other boys warned me that Imust take up a deﬁnite position, the ﬁgure of the Semitic general rose stillhigher in my esteem. To my youthful mind Hannibal and Rome symbol-ized the conﬂict between the tenacity of Jewry and the organization of theCatholic church. And the increasing importance of the effects of the anti-semitic movement upon our emotional life helped to ﬁx the thoughts andfeelings of those early days. Thus the wish to go to Rome had become inmy dream-life a cloak and symbol for a number of other passionate wishes.Their realization was to be pursued with all the perseverance and single-mindedness of the Carthaginian, though their fulﬁlment seemed at themoment just as little favoured by destiny as was Hannibal’s lifelong wishto enter Rome.
At that point I was brought up against the event in my youth whose
power was still being shown in all these emotions and dreams. I may havebeen ten or twelve years old, when my father began to take me with himon his walks and reveal to me in his talk his views upon things in the worldwe live in. Thus it was, on one such occasion, that he told me a story toshow me how much better things were now than they had been in hisdays. ‘When I was a young man,’ he said, ‘I went for a walk one Saturdayin the streets of your birthplace; I was well dressed, and had a new fur capon my head. A Christian came up to me and with a single blow knockedoff my cap into the mud and shouted: “Jew! get off the pavement!”’ ‘Andwhat did you do?’ I asked. ‘I went into the roadway and picked up mycap,’ was his quiet reply. This struck me as unheroic conduct on the part218 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1925:] The author in question must no doubt have been Jean
Paul.—[His decision to visit Rome was the turning-point in the career of Win -
ckelmann, the eighteenth-century founder of classical archaeology.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 218of the big, strong man who was holding the little boy by the hand. I con-
trasted this situation with another which ﬁtted my feelings better: thescene in which Hannibal’s father, Hamilcar Barca,
1made his boy swear be-
fore the household altar to take vengeance on the Romans. Ever since thattime Hannibal had had a place in my phantasies.
I believe I can trace my enthusiasm for the Carthaginian general a step
further back into my childhood; so that once more it would only havebeen a question of a transference of an already formed emotional relationon to a new object. One of the ﬁrst books that I got hold of when I hadlearnt to read was Thiers’ history of the Consulate and Empire. I can stillremember sticking labels on the ﬂat backs of my wooden soldiers with thenames of Napoleon’s marshals written on them. And at that time my de-clared favourite was already Masséna (or to give the name its Jewish form,Manasseh).
2(No doubt this preference was also partly to be explained by
the fact that my birthday fell on the same day as his, exactly a hundredyears later.)
3Napoleon himself lines up with Hannibal owing to their
both having crossed the Alps. It may even be that the development of thismartial ideal is traceable still further back into my childhood: to the timeswhen, at the age of three, I was in a close relation, sometimes friendly butsometimes warlike, with a boy a year older than myself, and to the wisheswhich the relation must have stirred up in the weaker of us.
4
The deeper one carries the analysis of a dream, the more often one
comes upon the track of experiences in childhood which have played apart among the sources of that dream’s latent content.
We have already seen (on p. 53) that a dream very seldom reproduces
recollections in such a way that they constitute, without abbreviation ormodiﬁcation, the whole of its manifest content. Nevertheless there are
some undoubted instances of this happening: and I can add a few more,relating, once more, to childhood scenes. One of my patients was pre-sented in a dream with an almost undistorted reproduction of a sexual219 B. Infantile Material
1 [Footnote added 1909:] In the ﬁrst edition the name of Hasdrubal appeared in-
stead: a puzzling mistake, which I have explained in my Psychopathology of Every-
day Life (1901b), Chapter X (2).
2 [Footnote added 1930:] Incidentally, doubts have been thrown on the Marshal’s
Jewish origin.
3 [This sentence was added in 1914.]
4 [A fuller account of this will be found on pp. 433 f. and 488 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 219episode, which was at once recognizable as a true recollection. His mem-
ory of the event had, in fact, never been completely lost in waking life,though it had become greatly obscured, and its revival was a consequenceof work previously done in analysis. At the age of twelve, the dreamer hadgone to visit a school friend who was laid up in bed, when the latter, bywhat was probably an accidental movement, uncovered his body. At thesight of his friend’s genitals, my patient had been overcome by some sortof compulsion and had uncovered himself too and caught hold of theother’s penis. His friend looked at him with indignation and astonish-ment; whereupon, overcome by embarrassment, he let go. This scene wasrepeated in a dream twenty-three years later, including all the details ofhis feelings at the time. It was modiﬁed, however, to this extent, that thedreamer assumed the passive instead of the active role, while the ﬁgure ofhis school-friend was replaced by someone belonging to his contemporarylife. (See also p. 211 f.)
It is true that as a rule the childhood scene is only represented in the
dream’s manifest content by an allusion, and has to be arrived at by an in-terpretation of the dream. Such instances, when they are recorded, cannotcarry much conviction, since as a rule there is no other evidence of thesechildhood experiences having occurred: if they date back to a very earlyage they are no longer recognized as memories. The general justiﬁcationfor inferring the occurrence of these childhood experiences from dreams isprovided by a whole number of factors in psycho-analytic work, which aremutually consistent and thus seem sufﬁciently trustworthy. If I recordsome of these inferred childhood experiences torn from their context forthe purposes of dream-interpretation, they may perhaps create little im-pression, especially as I shall not even be able to quote all the material onwhich the interpretations were based. Nevertheless I shall not allow this todeter me from relating them.
i
All the dreams of one of my women patients were characterized by her
being ‘rushed’: she would be in a violent rush to get somewhere in timenot to miss a train, and so on. In one dream she was going to call on awoman friend; her mother told her to take a cab and not to walk; but she raninstead and kept on falling down. —The material which came up in analy-
sis led to memories of rushing about and romping as a child. One partic-220 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 220ular dream recalled the favourite children’s game of saying a sentence ‘ Die
Kuh rannte, bis sie ﬁel ’ [‘The cow ran till it fell’] so quickly that it sounds
as though it were a single [nonsensical] word—another rush in fact. All
these innocent rushings-about with little girl friends were remembered
because they took the place of other, less innocent ones.
ii
Here is another woman patient’s dream: She was in a big room in
which all sorts of machines were standing, like what she imagined an or-thopaedic institute to be. She was told I had no time and that she must haveher treatment at the same time as ﬁve others. She refused, however, and wouldnot lie down in the bed—or whatever it was—that was meant for her. Shestood in the corner and waited for me to say it wasn’t true. Meanwhile theothers were laughing at her and saying it was just her way of ‘carrying on.’—Simultaneously, it was as though she was making a lot of small squares.
The ﬁrst part of the content of this dream related to the treatment and
was a transference on to me. The second part contained an allusion to ascene in childhood. The two parts were linked together by the mentionof the bed.
The orthopaedic institute referred back to a remark I had made in which
I had compared the treatment, alike in its length and in its nature, to anorthopaedic one. When I started her treatment I had been obliged to tell
her that for the time being I had not much time for her , though later I
should be able to give her a whole hour daily. This had stirred up her oldsensitiveness, which is a principal trait in the character of children inclinedto hysteria: they are insatiable for love. My patient had been the youngestof a family of six children (hence: at the same time as ﬁve others ) and had
therefore been her father’s favourite; but even so she seems to have felt thather adored father devoted too little of his time and attention to her.—Herwaiting for me to say it wasn’t true had the following origin. A young tai-
lor’s apprentice had brought her a dress and she had given him the moneyfor it. Afterwards she had asked her husband whether if the boy lost themoney she would have to pay it over again. Her husband, to tease her, had
said that was so. (The teasing in the dream.) She kept on asking over and
over again and waited for him to say after all it wasn’t true. It was then pos-
sible to infer that in the latent content of the dream she had had a thoughtof whether she would have to pay me twice as much if I gave her twice as221 B. Infantile Material9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 221much time—a thought which she felt was avaricious or ﬁlthy. (Uncleanli-
ness in childhood is often replaced in dreams by avariciousness for money;
the link between the two is the word ‘ﬁlthy.’1) If the whole passage about
waiting for me to say , etc., was intended in the dream as a circumlocution
for the word ‘ﬁlthy,’ then her ‘ standing in the corner ’ and ‘not lying down
in the bed ’ would ﬁt in with it as constituents of a scene from her child-
hood: a scene in which she had dirtied her bed and been punished by be-ing made to stand in the corner, with a threat that her father would notlove her any more and her brothers and sisters would laugh at her, and soon.—The small squares related to her little niece, who had shown her the
arithmetical trick of arranging the digits in nine squares (I believe this iscorrect) so that they add up in all directions to ﬁfteen.
iii
A man dreamt as follows: He saw two boys struggling—barrel-maker’s
boys, to judge by the implements lying around. One of the boys threw the otherdown; the boy on the ground had earrings with blue stones. He hurried to-wards the offender with his stick raised, to chastise him. The latter ﬂed forprotection to a woman, who was standing by a wooden fence, as though shewas his mother. She was a woman of the working classes and her back wasturned to the dreamer. At last she turned round and gave him a terrible lookso that he ran off in terror. The red ﬂesh of the lower lids of her eyes could beseen standing out .
The dream had made copious use of trivial events of the previous day.
He had in fact seen two boys in the street, one of whom threw the otherdown. When he hurried up to stop the ﬁght they had both taken to theirheels.— Barrel-maker’s boys. This was only explained by a subsequent
dream in which he used the phrase ‘knocking the bottom out of a barrel.’—
From his experience he believed that earrings with blue stones were mostly
worn by prostitutes. A line from a well-known piece of doggerel abouttwo boys then occurred to him: ‘The other boy was called Marie’ (i.e. was
a girl).— The woman standing. After the scene with the two boys he had
gone for a walk along the bank of the Danube and had proﬁted by theloneliness of the spot to micturate against a wooden fence. Further on, a222 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [This point was later enlarged upon by Freud (1908 b). But it already occurs in
a letter to Fliess of December 22, 1897 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 79).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 222respectably dressed elderly lady had smiled at him in a very friendly man-
ner and had wanted to give him her visiting-card. Since the woman in thedream was standing in the same position as he had been in when he wasmicturating, it must have been a question of a micturating woman. Thistallies with her terrible lookand the red ﬂesh standing out , which could
only relate to the gaping of the genitals caused by stooping. This, seen inhis childhood, reappeared, in later memory as ‘ proud ﬂesh ’—as a wound.
The dream combined two opportunities he had had as a little boy of
seeing little girls’ genitals: when they were thrown down and when they
were micturating. And from the other part of the context it emerged that
he had a recollection of being chastised or threatened by his father for the
sexual curiosity he had evinced on these occasions.
iv
Behind the following dream (dreamt by an elderly lady) there lay a
whole quantity of childhood memories, combined, as best they might be,into a single phantasy.
She went out in a violent rush to do some commissions. In the Graben
1she
sank down on her knees, as though she was quite broken-down. A large num-ber of people collected round her, especially cab-drivers; but no one helped herup. She made several vain attempts, and she must at last have succeeded, forshe was put into a cab which was to take her home. Someone threw a big,heavily-laden basket (like a shopping-basket) in through the window after her.
This was the same lady who always felt ‘rushed’ in her dreams, just as
she had rushed and romped about when she was a child. [See above,p. 220 f.] The ﬁrst scene in the dream was evidently derived from the sightof a horse fallen down; in the same way the word ‘ broken-down ’ referred
to horse-racing. In her youth she had ridden horses, and no doubt whenshe was still younger she had actually been a horse. The falling down was
related to a memory from very early childhood of the seventeen-year-oldson of the house-porter who had fallen down in the street in an epilepticﬁt and been brought home in a carriage. She had of course only heard
about this, but the idea of epileptic ﬁts (of the ‘ falling sickness’) had ob-
tained a hold on her imagination and had later inﬂuenced the form takenby her own hysterical attacks.—If a woman dreams of falling, it almost 223 B. Infantile Material
1 [One of the principal shopping centres in Vienna.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 223invariably has a sexual sense: she is imagining herself as a ‘ fallen woman.’
The present dream in particular scarcely left any room for doubt, since the
place where my patient fell was the Graben, a part of Vienna notorious asa promenade for prostitutes. The shopping-basket [Korb] led to more than
one interpretation. It reminded her of the numerous rebuffs [Körbe ]
1which
she had dealt out to her suitors, as well as of those which she complainedof having later received herself. This also connected with the fact that noone helped her up , which she herself explained as a rebuff. The shopping-
basket further reminded her of phantasies which had already come up in
her analysis, in which she was married far beneath her and had to go mar-keting herself. And lastly it might serve as the mark of a servant. At thispoint further childhood recollections emerged. First, of a cook who hadbeen dismissed for stealing, and who had fallen on her knees and begged to
be forgiven. She herself had been twelve at the time. Then, of a housemaidwho had been dismissed on account of a love-affair with the family coach-
man (who incidentally married her subsequently). Thus this memory was
also one of the sources of the coachmen ( drivers)
2in the dream (who, in
contradistinction to the actual coachman, failed to raise the fallenwoman). There remained to be explained the fact of the basket beingthrown in after her and through the window. This reminded her of handing
inluggage to be sent off by rail, of the country custom of lovers climbing
in through their sweethearts’ window, and of other little episodes from her
life in the country: how a gentleman had thrown some blue plums to a lady
through the window of her room, and how her own younger sister had been
scared by the village idiot looking in through her window. An obscure
memory from her tenth year then began to emerge, of a nurse in the coun-try who had had love-scenes (which the girl might have seen somethingof ) with one of the servants in the house and who, along with her lover,had been sent off, thrown out (the opposite of the dream-image ‘ thrown
in’)—a story that we had already approached from several other direc-
tions. A servant’s luggage or trunk is referred to contemptuously in Viennaas ‘seven plums ’: ‘pack up your seven plums and out you go!’
My records naturally include a large collection of patients’ dreams the
analysis of which led to obscure or entirely forgotten impressions of child-224 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [The word ‘ Korb’ (‘basket’) is commonly used for the rejection of an offer of
marriage.]
2 [The German word is the same ( Kutscher) in both cases.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 224hood, often going back to the ﬁrst three years of life. But it would be un-
safe to apply any conclusions drawn from them to dreams in general. Thepersons concerned were in every instance neurotics and in particular hys-terics; and it is possible that the part played by childhood scenes in theirdreams might be determined by the nature of their neurosis and not by thenature of dreams. Nevertheless, in analysing my own dreams—and, afterall, I am not doing so on account of any gross pathological symptoms—ithappens no less frequently that in the latent content of a dream I come un-expectedly upon a scene from childhood, and that all at once a whole se-ries of my dreams link up with the associations branching out from someexperience of my childhood. I have already given some instances of this[pp. 215–19], and I shall have others to give in a variety of connections. Icannot, perhaps, bring this section to a better close than by reporting oneor two dreams of mine in which recent occasions and long-forgotten ex-periences of childhood came together as sources of the dream.
i
Tired and hungry after a journey, I went to bed, and the major vital
needs began to announce their presence in my sleep; I dreamt as follows:
I went into a kitchen in search of some pudding. Three women were stand-
ing in it; one of them was the hostess of the inn and was twisting somethingabout in her hands, as though she was making Knödel [dumplings ]. She an-
swered that I must wait till she was ready. (These were not deﬁnite spoken
words.) I felt impatient and went off with a sense of injury. I put on an over-
coat. But the ﬁrst I tried on was too long for me. I took it off, rather surprisedto ﬁnd it was trimmed with fur. A second one that I put on had a long stripwith a Turkish design let into it. A stranger with a long face and a shortpointed beard came up and tried to prevent my putting it on, saying it washis. I showed him then that it was embroidered all over with a Turkish pat-tern. He asked: ‘What have the Turkish (designs, stripes . . .) to do with you?’But we then became quite friendly with each other.
When I began analysing this dream, I thought quite unexpectedly of
the ﬁrst novel I ever read (when I was thirteen, perhaps); as a matter of factI began at the end of the ﬁrst volume. I have never known the name of thenovel or of its author; but I have a vivid memory of its ending. The herowent mad and kept calling out the names of the three women who hadbrought the greatest happiness and sorrow into his life. One of these225 B. Infantile Material9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 225names was Pélagie. I still had no notion what this recollection was going
to lead to in the analysis. In connection with the three women I thought
of the three Fates who spin the destiny of man, and I knew that one of thethree women—the inn-hostess in the dream—was the mother who giveslife, and furthermore (as in my own case) gives the living creature its ﬁrstnourishment. Love and hunger, I reﬂected, meet at a woman’s breast. Ayoung man who was a great admirer of feminine beauty was talkingonce—so the story went—of the good-looking wet-nurse who had suckledhim when he was a baby: ‘I’m sorry,’ he remarked, ‘that I didn’t make abetter use of my opportunity.’ I was in the habit of quoting this anecdoteto explain the factor of ‘deferred action’ in the mechanism of the psy-choneuroses.
1—One of the Fates, then, was rubbing the palms of her
hands together as though she was making dumplings: a queer occupationfor a Fate, and one that cried out for an explanation. This was provided byanother and earlier memory of my childhood. When I was six years oldand was given my ﬁrst lessons by my mother, I was expected to believe thatwe were all made of earth and must therefore return to earth. This did notsuit me and I expressed doubts of the doctrine. My mother thereuponrubbed the palms of her hands together—just as she did in makingdumplings, except that there was no dough between them—and showedme the blackish scales of epidermis produced by the friction as a proof that
we were made of earth. My astonishment at this ocular demonstrationknew no bounds and I acquiesced in the belief which I was later to hearexpressed in the words: ‘Du bist der Natur einen Tod schuldig .’
2So they
really were Fates that I found in the kitchen when I went into it—as I hadso often done in my childhood when I was hungry, while my mother,standing by the ﬁre, had admonished me that I must wait till dinner was226 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [A reference to a superseded theory of the mechanism of hysteria, described in
the later sections of Part II of Freud’s early ‘Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology’
(Freud, 1950a).]
2 [‘Thou owest Nature a death.’ Evidently a reminiscence of Prince Hal’s remark
to Falstaff in 1H e n r y  I V , v. 1: ‘Thou owest God a death.’ Freud uses the same
words and ascribes them to Shakespeare in a letter to Fliess of February 6, 1899(Freud, 1950 a, Letter 104).]—Both of the emotions that were attached to these
childhood scenes—astonishment and submission to the inevitable—had oc-curred in a dream which I had had shortly before this one and which had ﬁrstreminded me of this event in my childhood.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 226ready.—And now for the dumplings—the Knödel! One at least of my
teachers at the University—and precisely the one to whom I owe my his-
tological knowledge (for instance of the epidermis) would infallibly be re-
minded by the name Knödl of a person against whom he had been obliged
to take legal action for plagiarizing his writings. The idea of plagiarizing—
of appropriating whatever one can, even though it belongs to someoneelse—clearly led on to the second part of the dream, in which I was treatedas though I were the thief who had for some time carried on his businessof stealing overcoats in the lecture-rooms. I had written down the word‘plagiarizing,’ without thinking about it, because it occurred to me; butnow I noticed that it could form a bridge [ Brücke ] between different pieces
of the dream’s manifest content. A chain of associations ( Pélagie—
 plagiarizing—plagiostomes
1or sharks [ Haiﬁsche ]—a ﬁsh’s swimming- bladder
[Fischblase]) connected the old novel with the case of Knödl and with the
overcoats, which clearly referred to implements used in sexual technique[see p. 208 f.]. (Cf. Maury’s alliterative dreams [on pp. 87 f.].) No doubt itwas a very far-fetched and senseless chain of thought; but I could neverhave constructed it in waking life unless it had already been constructed bythe dream-work. And, as though the need to set up forced connections re-garded nothing as sacred, the honoured name of Brücke
2(cf. the verbal
bridge above) reminded me of the Institute in which I spent the happiest
hours of my student life, free from all other desires—
So wird’s Euch an der Weisheit Brüsten
Mit jedem Tage mehr gelüsten3
—in complete contrast to the desires which were now plaguing me in my
dreams. Finally there came to mind another much respected teacher—hisname, Fleischl [‘Fleisch ’ = ‘meat’], like Knödl, sounded like something to227 B. Infantile Material
1 I have deliberately avoided enlarging upon the plagiostomes; they reminded me
of an unpleasant occasion on which I had disgraced myself in connection with
this same University teacher.
2 [For Brücke and Fleischl (below) see footnote, p. 487.]
3 [‘Thus, at the breasts of Wisdom clinging,
Thou’lt ﬁnd each day a greater rapture bringing.’
Goethe, Faust , Part I, [Scene 4]
(Bayard Taylor’s translation).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 227eat—and a distressing scene in which scales of epidermis played a part (my
mother and the inn-hostess) as well as madness (the novel) and a drug
from the dispensary1which removes hunger: cocaine.
I might pursue the intricate trains of thought further along these lines
and explain fully the part of the dream which I have not analysed; but I
must desist at this point because the personal sacriﬁce demanded wouldbe too great. I will only pick out one thread, which is qualiﬁed to lead usstraight to one of the dream-thoughts underlying the confusion. Thestranger with the long face and pointed beard who tried to prevent myputting on the overcoat bore the features of a shop-keeper at Spalato fromwhom my wife had bought a quantity of Turkish stuffs. He was called
Popovi
N, an equivocal name,2on which a humorous writer, Stettenheim,
has already made a suggestive comment: ‘He told me his name and blush-ingly pressed my hand.’ Once again I found myself misusing a name, as Ialready had done with Pélagie, Knödl, Brücke and Fleischl. It couldscarcely be denied that playing about with names like this was a kind ofchildish naughtiness. But if I indulged in it, it was as an act of retribution;for my own name had been the victim of feeble witticisms like these oncountless occasions.
3Goethe, I recalled, had remarked somewhere upon
people’s sensitiveness about their names: how we seem to have grown intothem like our skin. He had said this à propos of a line written on his name
by Herder:
‘Der du von Göttern abstammst, von Gothen oder vom Kote.’—‘So seid ihr Götterbilder auch zu Staub.’
4
I noticed that my digression on the subject of the misuse of names wasonly leading up to this complaint. But I must break off here.—My wife’s228 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [In German ‘ lateinische Küche ’ (literally, ‘Latin kitchen’).—Cf. footnote 1, p. 136.]
2 [‘Popo ’ is a childish word for ‘bottom.’]
3 ‘Freud ’ is the German word for ‘joy.’]
4 [The ﬁrst of these lines comes from a facetious note written by Herder to Goethe
with a request for the loan of some books: ‘Thou who art the offspring of gods
or of Goths or of dung—(Goethe, send them to me!)’ The second line, a furtherfree association of Freud’s, is taken from the well-known recognition scene inGoethe’s Iphigenie auf T auris. Iphigenia, hearing from Pylades of the death of so
many heroes during the siege of T roy, exclaims: ‘So you too, divine ﬁgures, haveturned to dust!’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 228purchase made at Spalato reminded me of another purchase, made at
Cattaro,1which I had been too cautious over, so that I had lost an oppor-
tunity of making some nice acquisitions. (Cf. the neglected opportunitywith the wet-nurse.) For one of the thoughts which my hunger intro-duced into the dream was this: ‘One should never neglect an opportunity,but always take what one can even when it involves doing a small wrong.One should never neglect an opportunity, since life is short and death in-evitable.’ Because this lesson of ‘ carpe diem ’ had among other meanings a
sexual one, and because the desire it expressed did not stop short of doingwrong, it had reason to dread the censorship and was obliged to concealitself behind a dream. All kinds of thoughts having a contrary sense then
found voice: memories of a time when the dreamer was content with spir-
itual food, restraining thoughts of every kind and even threats of the most
revolting sexual punishments.
ii
The next dream calls for a rather long preamble:I had driven to the Western Station [in Vienna] to take the train for my
summer holiday at Aussee, but had arrived on the platform while an earliertrain, going to Ischl, was still standing in the station. There I had seenCount Thun
2who was once again travelling to Ischl for an audience with
the Emperor. Though it was raining, he had arrived in an open carriage. Hehad walked straight in through the entrance for the Local T rains. The ticketinspector at the gate had not recognized him and had tried to take histicket, but he had waved the man aside with a curt motion of his hand andwithout giving any explanation. After the train for Ischl had gone out, Iought by rights to have left the platform again and returned to the waitingroom; and it had cost me some trouble to arrange matters so that I was al-lowed to stop on the platform. I had passed the time in keeping a look-outto see if anyone came along and tried to get a reserved compartment by ex-ercising some sort of ‘pull.’ I had intended in that case to make a loud229 B. Infantile Material
1 [Spalato and Cattaro: both towns on the Dalmatian coast.]
2 [Austrian politician (1847–1916) of reactionary views; an upholder of Bo-
hemian self-government as against the German nationalists; Austrian premier
1898–9.—Ischl, in Upper Austria, where the Court regularly spent the summermonths.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 229protest: that is to say to claim equal rights. Meantime I had been humming
a tune to myself which I recognized as Figaro’s aria from Le Nozze di Figaro:
Se vuol ballare, signor contino,Se vuol ballare, signor contino,Il chitarino le suonerò
1
(It is a little doubtful whether anyone else would have recognized the tune.)
The whole evening I had been in high spirits and in a combative
mood. I had chaffed my waiter and my cab-driver—without, I hope,hurting their feelings. And now all kinds of insolent and revolutionaryideas were going through my head, in keeping with Figaro’s words andwith my recollections of Beaumarchais’ comedy which I had seen actedby the Comédie française. I thought of the phrase about the great gentle-
men who had taken the trouble to be born, and of the droit du Seigneur
which Count Almaviva tried to exercise over Susanna. I thought, too, ofhow our malicious opposition journalists made jokes over Count Thun’sname, calling him instead ‘Count Nichtsthun.’
2Not that I envied him.
He was on his way to a difﬁcult audience with the Emperor, while Iwas
the real Count Do-nothing—just off on my holidays. There followed allsorts of enjoyable plans for the holidays. At this point a gentleman cameon to the platform whom I recognized as a Government invigilator atmedical examinations, and who by his activities in that capacity had wonthe ﬂattering nickname of ‘Government bedfellow.’
3He asked to be given
a ﬁrst-class half-compartment to himself in virtue of his ofﬁcial position,and I heard one railwayman saying to another: ‘Where are we to put thegentleman with the half ﬁrst-class ticket?’
4This, I thought to myself, was
a ﬁne example of privilege; after all Ihad paid the full ﬁrst-class fare. And
I did in fact get a compartment to myself, but not in a corridor coach, sothat there would be no lavatory available during the night. I complainedto an ofﬁcial without any success; but I got my own back on him by sug-230 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [‘If my Lord Count is inclined to go dancing,
If my Lord Count is inclined to go dancing,
I’ll be quite ready to play him a tune . . .’]
2 [‘Count Do-nothing.’ ‘ Thun’ is the German word for ‘to do.’]
3 [‘Beischläfer,’ literally ‘one who sleeps with someone’ because he used to go to
sleep instead of invigilating.]
4 [Being a government ofﬁcial, he had been able to buy his ticket at half-rates.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 230gesting that he should at all events have a hole made in the ﬂoor of the
compartment to meet the possible needs of passengers. And in fact I didwake up at a quarter to three in the morning with a pressing need to mic-turate, having had the following dream:
A crowd of people, a meeting of students.—A count (Thun or T aaffe
1) was
speaking. He was challenged to say something about the Germans, and de-clared with a contemptuous gesture that their favourite ﬂower was colt’s foot,and put some sort of dilapidated leaf—or rather the crumpled skeleton of aleaf—into his buttonhole. I ﬁred up—so I ﬁred up,
2though I was surprised
at my taking such an attitude.
(Then, less distinctly:) It was as though I was in the Aula,3trances were
cordoned off and we had to escape. I made my way through a series of beauti-fully furnished rooms, evidently ministerial or public apartments, with furni-ture upholstered in a colour between brown and violet; at last I came to acorridor, in which a housekeeper was sitting, an elderly stout woman. Iavoided speaking to her, but she evidently thought I had a right to pass, forshe asked whether she should accompany me with the lamp. I indicated to her,by word or gesture, that she was to stop on the staircase; and I felt I was beingvery cunning in thus avoiding inspection at the exit. I got downstairs andfound a narrow and steep ascending path, along which I went.
(Becoming indistinct again) . . . It was as though the second problem was
to get out of the town, just as the ﬁrst one had been to get out of the house. Iwas driving in a cab and ordered the driver to drive me to a station. ‘I can’tdrive with you along the railway-line itself,’ I said, after he had raised someobjection, as though I had overtired him. It was as if I had already driven withhim for some of the distance one normally travels by train. The stations werecordoned off. I wondered whether to go to Krems or Znaim,
4but reﬂected that231 B. Infantile Material
1 Austrian politician (1833–95); premier 1870–1 and 1879–93. Like Count
Thun, he favoured some degree of independence for the non-German parts of
the Empire.]
2 This repetition crept into my record of the dream, apparently through inadver-
tence. I have let it stand, since the analysis showed that it was signiﬁcant. [TheGerman is ‘ ich fahre auf ’; ‘fahren ’ also means ‘to drive’ or ‘to travel’ and is used
repeatedly in these senses later in the dream. See on this point p. 441 n.]
3 [The great ceremonial hall of the University.]
4 [Krems in Lower Austria and Znaim in Moravia were neither of them Imperial
residences.—Graz is the capital of the province of Styria.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 231the Court would be in residence there, so I decided in favour of Graz, or some
such place. I was now sitting in the compartment, which was like a carriageon the Stadtbahn [the suburban railway] ; and in my buttonhole I had a
 peculiar plaited, long-shaped object, and beside it some violet-brown violetsmade of a stiff material. This greatly struck people. (At this point the scene
broke off.)
Once more I was in front of the station, but this time in the company of
an elderly gentleman. I thought of a plan for remaining unrecognized; andthen saw that this plan had already been put into effect. It was as thoughthinking and experiencing were one and the same thing. He appeared to beblind, at all events with one eye, and I handed him a male glass urinal(which we had to buy or had bought in town). So I was a sick-nurse and hadto give him the urinal because he was blind. If the ticket-collector were to seeus like that, he would be certain to let us get away without noticing us. Herethe man’s attitude and his micturating penis appeared in plastic form. (This
was the point at which I awoke, feeling a need to micturate.)
The dream as a whole gives one the impression of being in the nature
of a phantasy in which the dreamer was carried back to the Revolutionaryyear 1848. Memories of that year had been recalled to me by the [Em-peror Francis Joseph’s] Jubilee in 1898, as well as by a short trip which Ihad made to the Wachau, in the course of which I had visited Emmers-
dorf,
1the place of retirement of the student-leader Fischhof, to whom
certain elements in the manifest content of the dream may allude. My as-sociations then led me to England and to my brother’s house there. Heused often to tease his wife with the words ‘Fifty Years Ago’ (from the titleof one of Lord Tennyson’s poems),
2which his children used then to cor-
rect to ‘ ﬁfteen years ago.’ This revolutionary phantasy, however, which was232 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [The Wachau is a stretch of the Danube valley some ﬁfty miles above Vienna.—
Footnote added 1925:] This is a mistake, but not a slip this time. I only learnt
later that the Emmersdorf in the Wachau is not to be identiﬁed with the place
of the same name which was the refuge of the revolutionary leader Fischhof. [Areference to this mistake will be found in The Psychopathology of Everyday Life
(Freud, 1901b), Chapter X (3).]
2 [No poem by Tennyson seems to bear this title. The reference is perhaps to his
ode ‘On the Jubilee of Queen Victoria,’ in which the words ‘ﬁfty years’ (thoughnot ‘ﬁfty years ago’) occur repeatedly. Or, alternatively, the allusion may be tothe second ‘Locksley Hall’: ‘Sixty Years After.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 232derived from ideas aroused in me by seeing Count Thun, was like the
façade of an Italian church in having no organic relation with the struc-ture lying behind it. But it differed from those façades in being disorderedand full of gaps, and in the fact that portions of the interior constructionhad forced their way through into it at many points.
The ﬁrst situation in the dream was an amalgam of several scenes,
which I can separate out. The insolent attitude adopted by the Count inthe dream was copied from a scene at my secondary school when I wasﬁfteen years old. We had hatched a conspiracy against an unpopular and
ignorant master, the moving spirit of which had been one of my school-fellows who since those days seemed to have taken Henry VIII of England
as his model. The leadership in the chief assault was allotted to me, andthe signal for open revolt was a discussion on the signiﬁcance of theDanube to Austria (cf. the Wachau). One of our fellow-conspirators had
been the only aristocratic boy in the class, who, on account of his remark-able length of limb, was called ‘the Giraffe.’ He was standing up, like theCount in my dream, having been taken to task by the school tyrant, theGerman language master. The favourite ﬂower and the putting into his but-
tonhole of something in the nature of a ﬂower (which last made me think
of some orchids which I had brought the same day for a woman friendand also of a rose of Jericho
1) were a striking reminder of the scene in one
of Shakespeare’s historical plays [ 3 Henry VI , I. 1] which represented the
beginning of the Wars of the Red and White Roses. (The mention of
Henry VIII opened the way to this recollection.)—From there it was only
a short step to red and white carnations. (T wo little couplets, one in Ger-man and the other in Spanish, slipped into the analysis at this point:
Rosen, T ulpen, Nelken,alle Blumen welken.
Isabelita, no llores,
que se marchitan las ﬂores.
2
The appearance of a Spanish couplet led back to Figaro.) Here in Vienna
white carnations had become an emblem of anti-semitism, and red ones233 B. Infantile Material
1 [The ‘Resurrection plant,’ whose dried fronds unfold under moisture.]
2 [‘Roses, tulips, carnations: every ﬂower fades.’ (Lines often found in nineteenth cen-
tury ‘common-place books.’)—‘ Isabelita , do not weep because the ﬂowers fade.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 233of the Social Democrats. Behind this lay a recollection of a piece of anti-
semitic provocation during a railway journey in the lovely Saxon coun-tryside (cf. Anglo-Saxon).—The third scene which contributed to the
formation of the ﬁrst situation in the dream dated from my early studentdays. There was a discussion in a German students’ club on the relation
of philosophy to the natural sciences. I was a green youngster, full of ma-terialistic theories, and thrust myself forward to give expression to an ex-tremely one-sided point of view. Thereupon someone who was my seniorand my superior, someone who has since then shown his ability as aleader of men and an organizer of large groups (and who also, inciden-tally, bears a name derived from the Animal Kingdom
1), stood up and
gave us a good talking-to: he too, he told us, had fed swine in his youthand returned repentant to his father’s house. I ﬁred up (as I did in the
dream) and replied boorishly [‘ saugrob,’ literally ‘swinishly gross’] that
since I now knew that he had fed swine in his youth I was no longer sur-
prised at the tone of his speeches. (In the dream I was surprised at my
 German-nationalist attitude. [Cf. p. 358.]) There was a general uproarand I was called upon from many sides to withdraw my remarks, but I re-fused to do so. The man I had insulted was too sensible to look upon theincident as a challenge , and let the affair drop.
The remaining elements of this ﬁrst situation in the dream were de-
rived from deeper layers. What was the meaning of the Count’s pro-nouncement about colt’s foot? To ﬁnd the answer, I followed a train ofassociations: colt’s foot [‘ Huﬂattich ,’ literally ‘hoof lettuce’]—lettuce—
salad—dog-in-the-manger [‘Salathund ,’ literally ‘salad dog’]. Here was a
whole collection of terms of abuse: ‘Gir-affe’ [‘ Affe’ is the German for
‘ape’], ‘swine,’ ‘dog’—and I could have arrived at ‘donkey’ if I had madea détour through another name and insulted yet another academicteacher. Moreover, I translated ‘colt’s foot’—whether rightly or wronglyI could not tell—by the French ‘ pisse-en-lit ’.
2This information was de-
rived from Zola’s Germinal , in which a child was told to pick some of
that plant for salad. The French word for ‘dog’—‘ chien ’—reminded me
of the major function (‘ chier’ in French, compared with ‘pisser ’ for the mi-
nor one). Soon, I thought, I should have collected examples of impropri-234 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Presumably Viktor Adler (‘eagle’), the Austrian Social Democrat leader (1852–
1918). Cf.‘ Adler’ on p. 235 below.]
1 [‘Pissenlit ’ actually means ‘dandelion.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 234ety in all three states of matter—solid, liquid and gaseous;—for this same
book, Germinal , which had plenty to do with the approaching revolution,
contained an account of a very peculiar sort of competition—for the pro-duction of a gaseous excretion known by the name of ‘ﬂatus.’
1I now saw
that the path leading to ﬂatus had been prepared far ahead: from ﬂowers ,
through the Spanish couplet, Isabelita, Isabella and Ferdinand, Henry VIII,
English history, and the Armada which sailed against England , after whose
defeat a medal was struck, bearing the inscription ‘ Flavit et dissipati
sunt,’2since the stormblast had scattered the Spanish ﬂeet. I had thought,
half seriously, of using those words as the heading to the chapter on‘Therapy,’ if ever I got so far as producing a detailed account of my theoryand treatment of hysteria.
T urning now to the second episode of the dream, I am unable to deal
with it in such detail—out of consideration for the censorship. For I wasputting myself in the place of an exalted personage of those revolutionarytimes, who also had an adventure with an eagle [ Adler ] and is said to have
suffered from incontinence of the bowels, and so on. I thought to myselfthat I should not be justiﬁed in passing the censorship at this point, even
though the greater part of the story was told me by a Hofrat (a consiliariusaulicus [court councillor]—cf. Aula). The series of public rooms in the
dream were derived from His Excellency’s saloon carriage, of which I hadsucceeded in getting a glimpse. But the ‘rooms’ [ Zimmer ] also meant
‘women’ [ Frauenzimmer] as is often the case in dreams
3—in this instance
‘public women.’ In the ﬁgure of the housekeeper I was showing my lackof gratitude towards a witty elderly lady and ill repaying her hospitalityand the many good stories that I heard while I was stopping in her235 B. Infantile Material
1 Not in fact in Germinal but in La terre: a mistake which I only observed after I
had completed the analysis.—Notice the occurrence of the same letters in ‘ Hu-
ﬂattich ’ [‘colt’s foot’] and ‘ ﬂatus. ’
2 [‘He blew and they were scattered.’— Footnote added 1925:] An unsolicited bi-
ographer, Dr. Fritz Wittels [1924, 21; Engl. trans. (1924), 28] has charged me
with having omitted the name of Jehovah from the above motto. [Added 1930:]
The English medallion bears the deity’s name in Hebrew lettering on a cloud inthe background. It is so placed that it can be taken as being part either of the de-sign or of the inscription.—[The idea of using the words as a motto at the headof a chapter on therapy is mentioned in a letter to Fliess of January 3, 1897(Freud, 1950a, Letter 54).]
3 [‘Frauenzimmer ,’ literally ‘women’s apartment,’ is commonly used in German as
a slightly derogatory word for ‘woman.’ Cf. p. 367.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 235house.—The allusion to the lamp went back to Grillparzer,1who intro-
duced a charming episode of a similar kind, which he had actually experi-
enced, into his tragedy about Hero and Leander, Des Meeres und der Liebe
Wellen [‘The Waves of the Sea and of Love’]—the Armada and the storm.2
I must also refrain from any detailed analysis of the two remaining
episodes of the dream.3I will merely pick out the elements leading to the
two childhood scenes on whose account alone I embarked upon a discus-sion of this dream. It will rightly be suspected that what compels me tomake this suppression is sexual material; but there is no need to rest con-tent with this explanation. After all, there are many things which one hasto keep secret from other people but of which one makes no secret tooneself; and the question here is not as to why I am obliged to concealthe solution but as to the motives for the internal censorship which hid
the true content of the dream from myself. I must therefore explain that theanalysis of these three [last] episodes of the dream showed that they wereimpertinent boastings, the issue of an absurd megalomania which hadlong been suppressed in my waking life and a few of whose ramiﬁcationshad even made their way into the dream’s manifest content (e.g. ‘ I felt I
was being very cunning ’), and which incidentally accounted for my exu-
berant spirits during the evening before I had the dream. The boastingextended to all spheres; for instance, the mention of Graz went back to
the slang phrase ‘What’s the price of Graz?’ which expresses the self- satisfaction of a person who feels extremely well-off. The ﬁrst episode ofthe dream may also be included among the boastings by anyone who willbear in mind the great Rabelais’ incomparable account of the life anddeeds of Gargantua and his son Pantagruel.
Here is the material relating to the two childhood scenes which I have
promised my readers. I had bought a new trunk for the journey, of a
brownish violet colour. This colour appears more than once in the dream:236 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [The well-known Austrian dramatist (1791–1872).]
2 [Footnote added 1911:] In an interesting paper, Silberer (1910) has tried to show
from this part of my dream that the dream-work can succeed in reproducing not
only the latent dream-thoughts but also the psychical processes that take placeduring the formation of dreams. (This is what he terms ‘the functional phenom-enon.’) [See below, pp. 507 ff.— Added 1914:] But he is, I think, overlooking the
fact that ‘the psychical processes that take place during the formation of dreams’were, like the rest, part of the material of my thoughts. In this boastful dream I
was evidently proud of having discovered those processes.
3 [The ﬁrst of these is in fact further analysed on pp. 440 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 236the violet-brown violets made of a stiff material and beside them a thing
known as a ‘Mädchenfänger ’ [‘girl-catcher’]1—and the furniture in the
ministerial apartments. It is commonly believed by children that people are
struck by anything new . The following scene from my childhood has been
described to me, and my memory of the description has taken the place of
my memory of the scene itself. It appears that when I was two years old Istill occasionally wetted the bed , and when I was reproached for this I con-
soled my father by promising to buy him a nice new red bed in N., the near-
est town of any size. This was the origin of the parenthetical phrase in thedream to the effect that we had bought or had to buy the urinal in town: one
must keep one’s promises. (Notice, too, the juxtaposition in symbolism ofthe male urinal and the female trunk or box. [Cf. pp. 177 f.]) This promiseof mine exhibited all the megalomania of childhood. We have alreadycome across the signiﬁcant part played in dreams by children’s difﬁcultiesin connection with micturition (cf. the dream reported on p. 222). Wehave also learned from the psychoanalysis of neurotic subjects the intimateconnection between bed-wetting and the character trait of ambition.
2
When I was seven or eight years old there was another domestic scene,
which I can remember very clearly. One evening before going to sleep I dis-regarded the rules which modesty lays down and obeyed the calls of naturein my parents’ bedroom while they were present. In the course of his repri-mand, my father let fall the words: ‘The boy will come to nothing.’ Thismust have been a frightful blow to my ambition, for references to this sceneare still constantly recurring in my dreams and are always linked with anenumeration of my achievements and successes, as though I wanted to say:‘You see, I havecome to something.’ This scene, then, provided the material
for the ﬁnal episode of the dream, in which—in revenge, of course—theroles were interchanged. The older man (clearly my father, since his blind-ness in one eye referred to his unilateral glaucoma)
3was now micturating in237 B. Infantile Material
1 [This word, ordinarily used in the sense of ‘rake’ (see footnote 3 on p. 238), seems
here to be the slang name of some sort of buttonhole. Cf. corresponding terms
such as ‘fascinator’ and ‘beaucatcher’ used in America for women’s head-dresses.]
2 [This sentence was added in 1914. The ﬁrst mention of the connection seems
to have been made in the last paragraph of Freud’s paper on ‘Character and AnalErotism’ (1908 b).]
3 There is another interpretation. He was one-eyed like Odin, the father-god.—
Odhins Trost [Odin’s Consolation , a mythological novel by Felix Dahn (1880)]—
The consolation I offered him in the ﬁrst childhood scene of buying him a new bed.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 237front of me, just as I had in front of him in my childhood. In the reference
to his glaucoma I was reminding him of the cocaine, which had helped himin the operation [cf. pp. 194 f.], as though I had in that way kept my prom-ise. Moreover, I was making fun of him; I had to hand him the urinal be-cause he was blind, and I revelled in allusions to my discoveries inconnection with the theory of hysteria, of which I felt so proud.
1
The two scenes of micturition from my childhood were in any case
closely linked to the topic of megalomania; but their emergence while Iwas travelling to Aussee was further assisted by the chance circumstancethat there was no lavatory attached to my compartment and that I hadreason to anticipate the predicament which in fact arose in the morning.I awoke with the sensations of a physical need. One might, I think, be in-clined to suppose that these sensations were the actual provoking agent ofthe dream; but I would prefer to take another view, namely that the desireto micturate was only called up by the dream-thoughts. It is quite un-usual for me to be disturbed in my sleep by physical needs of any kind,especially at the hour at which I awoke on this occasion—a quarter tothree in the morning. And I may meet a further objection by remarkingthat upon other journeys under more comfortable conditions I have238 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 Here is some further interpretative material. Handing him the glass [urinal] re-
minded me of the story of the peasant at the optician’s, trying glass after glass
and still not being able to read.—(Peasant- catcher [Bauernfänger, ‘sharper’]: girl -
catcher [Mädchenfänger ] in the preceding episode of the dream.)—The way in
which the father in Zola’s La terre was treated among the peasants after he had
grown feeble-minded.—The tragic requital that lay in my father’s soiling his bedlike a child during the last days of his life [cf. p. 437], hence my appearance inthe dream as a sick-nurse.—‘Here it was as though thinking and experiencing were
one and the same thing.’ This recalled a strongly revolutionary literary play byOskar Panizza [‘Das Liebeskonzil ’ (1895)], in which God the Father is ignomin-
iously treated as a paralytic old man. In his case will and deed were representedas one and the same thing, and he had to be restrained from cursing and swear-ing by one of his archangels, a kind of Ganymede, because his imprecationswould be promptly fulﬁlled.—My making plans was a reproach against my fa-
ther dating from a later period. And indeed the whole rebellious content of thedream, with its lèse majesté and its derision of the higher authorities, went back
to rebellion against my father. A Prince is known as the father of his country; thefather is the oldest, ﬁrst, and for children the only authority, and from his auto-cratic power the other social authorities have developed in the course of the his-tory of human civilization—except in so far as the ‘matriarchy’ calls for a9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 238scarcely ever felt a need to micturate when I have woken up early. But in
any case it will do no harm to leave the point unresolved.1
My experiences in analysing dreams have drawn my attention to the
fact that trains of thought reaching back to earliest childhood lead offeven from dreams which seem at ﬁrst sight to have been completely in-terpreted, since their sources and instigating wish have been discoveredwithout difﬁculty. I have therefore been compelled to ask myself whetherthis characteristic may not be a further essential precondition of dream-ing. Stated in general terms, this would imply that every dream waslinked in its manifest content with recent experiences and in its latentcontent with the most ancient experiences. And I have in fact been ableto show in my analysis of hysteria that these ancient experiences have re-mained recent in the proper sense of the word up to the immediate pres-ent. It is still extremely hard to demonstrate the truth of this suspicion;and I shall have to return in another connection (Chapter VII, [pp. 553ff.]) to a consideration of the probable part played by the earliest experi-ences of childhood in the formation of dreams.
Of the three characteristics of memory in dreams enumerated at the
beginning of this chapter, one—the preference for non-essential materials239 B. Infantile Material
qualiﬁcation of this assertion.—The phrase ‘ thinking and experiencing were one
and the same thing’ had a reference to the explanation of hysterical symptoms,
and the ‘ male urinal ’ belonged in the same connection. I need not explain to a
Viennese the principle of the ‘ Gschnas.’ It consists in constructing what appear
to be rare and precious objects out of trivial and preferably comic and worthlessmaterials (for instance, in making armour out of saucepans, wisps of straw anddinner rolls)—a favourite pastime at bohemian parties here in Vienna. I had ob-served that this is precisely what hysterical subjects do: alongside what has reallyhappened to them, they unconsciously build up frightful or perverse imaginaryevents which they construct out of the most innocent and everyday material oftheir experience. It is to these phantasies that their symptoms are in the ﬁrst in-stance attached and not to their recollections of real events, whether serious orequally innocent. This revelation had helped me over a number of difﬁcultiesand had given me particular pleasure. What made it possible for me to refer tothis by means of the dream-element of the ‘male urinal’ was as follows. I hadbeen told that at the latest ‘ Gschnas ’-night a poisoned chalice belonging to Lu-
crezia Borgia had been exhibited; its central and principal constituent had beena male urinal of the type used in hospitals.
1 [This dream is further discussed on pp. 440 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 239in the content of dreams—has been satisfactorily cleared up by being
traced back to dream-distortion. We have been able to conﬁrm the exis-tence of the other two—the emphasis upon recent and upon infantilematerial—but we have not been able to account for them on the basis ofthe motives that lead to dreaming. These two characteristics, whose ex-planation and appreciation remain to be discovered, must be kept inmind. Their proper place must be looked for elsewhere—either in thepsychology of the state of sleep or in the discussion of the structure of themental apparatus upon which we shall later embark, after we have learntthat the interpretation of dreams is like a window through which we canget a glimpse of the interior of that apparatus. [See Chapter VII.]
There is, however, another inference following from these last dream-
analyses to which I will draw attention at once. Dreams frequently seemto have more than one meaning. Not only, as our examples have shown,may they include several wish-fulﬁlments one alongside the other; but asuccession of meanings or wish-fulﬁlments may be superimposed on oneanother, the bottom one being the fulﬁlment of a wish dating from earliestchildhood. And here again the question arises whether it might not bemore correct to assert that this occurs ‘invariably’ rather than ‘frequently.’
1
(C)
THE SOMATIC SOURCES OF DREAMS
If one tries to interest an educated layman in the problems of dreams
and, with that end in view, asks him what in his opinion are the sourcesfrom which they arise, one ﬁnds as a rule that he feels conﬁdent of pos-sessing the answer to this part of the question. He thinks at once of the240 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] The fact that the meanings of dreams are arranged in su-
perimposed layers is one of the most delicate, though also one of the most inter-
esting, problems of dream-interpretation. Anyone who forgets this possibilitywill easily go astray and be led into making untenable assertions upon the natureof dreams. Yet it is still a fact that far too few investigations have been made intothis matter. Hitherto the only thorough piece of research has been Otto Rank’s[1912a] into the fairly regular stratiﬁcation of symbols in dreams provoked bypressure of the bladder. [See below, pp. 412 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 240effects produced on the construction of dreams by digestive disturbances
or difﬁculties—‘dreams come from indigestion’ [cf. p. 54]—by posturesaccidentally assumed by the body and by other small incidents duringsleep. It never seems to occur to him that when all these factors have beentaken into account anything is left over that needs explaining.
I have already discussed at length in the opening chapter (Section C)
the part assigned by scientiﬁc writers to somatic sources of stimulation inthe formation of dreams; so that here I need only recall the results of thatenquiry. We found that three different kinds of somatic sources of stimu-lation were distinguished: objective sensory stimuli arising from externalobjects, internal states of excitation of the sense organs having only a sub-jective basis, and somatic stimuli derived from the interior of the body.We noticed moreover that the authorities were inclined to push into thebackground, or to exclude entirely, any possible psychical sources of
dreams, as compared with these somatic stimuli (cf. p. 71). In our exam-ination of the claims made on behalf of somatic sources of stimulation wearrived at the following conclusions. The signiﬁcance of objective excita-
tions of the sense organs (consisting partly of chance stimuli during sleepand partly of excitations such as cannot fail to impinge even upon a sleep-ing mind) is established from numerous observations and has been exper-imentally conﬁrmed (cf. pp. 55 f.). The part played by subjective sensory
excitations seems to be demonstrated by the recurrence in dreams of hyp-nagogic sensory images (cf. pp. 62 f.). And lastly it appears that, thoughit is impossible to prove that the images and ideas occurring in ourdreams can be traced back to internal somatic stimuli to the extent to
which this has been asserted to be the case, nevertheless this origin ﬁndssupport in the universally recognized inﬂuence exercised upon ourdreams by states of excitation in our digestive, urinary and sexual organs[cf. pp. 68 f.].
It would appear, then, that ‘nervous stimulation’ and ‘somatic stimu-
lation’ are the somatic sources of dreams—that is to say, according tomany writers, their sole source.
On the other hand, we have already found a number of doubts ex-
pressed, which seemed to imply a criticism, not indeed of the correctness ,
but of the adequacy of the theory of somatic stimulation.
However secure the supporters of this theory might feel in its factual
basis—especially as far as accidental and external nervous stimuli are con-cerned, since these can be traced in the content of dreams without anytrouble at all—not one of them could fail to perceive that it is impossible241 C. Somatic Sources9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 241to attribute the wealth of ideational material in dreams to external nervous
stimuli alone. Miss Mary Whiton Calkins (1893, 312) examined her ownand another person’s dreams for six weeks with this question in mind. Shefound that in only 13.2 per cent and 6.7 per cent of them respectively wasit possible to trace the element of external sense- perception; while onlytwo cases in the collection were derivable from organic sensations. Herewe have statistical conﬁrmation of what I had been led to suspect from ahasty survey of my own experiences.
It has often been proposed to separate off ‘dreams due to nervous stim-
ulation’ from other forms of dreams as a subspecies that has been thor-oughly investigated. Thus Spitta [1882, 233] divides dreams into ‘dreamsdue to nervous stimulation’ and ‘dreams due to association.’ This solutionwas, however, bound to remain unsatisfactory so long as it was impossibleto demonstrate the link between the somatic sources of a dream and itsideational content. Thus, in addition to the ﬁrst objection—the insufﬁ-cient frequency of external sources of stimulation—there was a secondone—the insufﬁcient explanation of dreams afforded by such sources. Wehave a right to expect the supporters of this theory to give us explanationsof two points: ﬁrst, why it is that the external stimulus of a dream is notperceived in its true character but is invariably misunderstood (cf. thealarm-clock dreams on pp. 59 f.); and secondly, why it is that the reactionof the perceiving mind to these misunderstood stimuli should lead to re-sults of such unpredictable variety.
By way of answer to these questions, Strümpell (1877, 108 f.) tells us
that, because the mind is withdrawn from the external world during sleep,it is unable to give a correct interpretation of objective sensory stimuli andis obliged to construct illusions on the basis of what is in many respects anindeterminate impression. To quote his own words: ‘As soon as a sensationor complex of sensations or a feeling or a psychical process of any kindarises in the mind during sleep as a result of an external or internal nervousstimulus and is perceived by the mind, that process calls up sensory imagesfrom the circle of experiences left over in the mind from the wakingstate—that is to say, earlier perceptions—which are either bare or accom-panied by their appropriate psychical values. The process surrounds itself,as it were, with a larger or smaller number of images of this kind andthrough them the impression derived from the nervous stimulus acquiresits psychical value. We speak here (just as we usually do in the case of wak-ing behaviour) of the sleeping mind “interpreting” the impressions made242 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 242by the nervous stimulus. The outcome of this interpretation is what we
describe as a “dream due to nervous stimulation,” that is, a dream whosecomponents are determined by a nervous stimulus producing its psychicaleffects in the mind according to the laws of reproduction.’ [Cf. pp. 60 f.,83 f. and 87.]
Wundt [1874, 656 f.] is saying something essentially identical with
this theory when he asserts that the ideas occurring in dreams are derived,for the most part at least, from sensory stimuli, including especially co-enaesthetic sensations, and are for that reason mainly imaginative illu-sions and probably only to a small extent pure mnemic ideas intensiﬁedinto hallucinations. [Cf. pp. 71 f.] Strümpell (1877, 84) has hit upon anapt simile for the relation which subsists on this theory between the con-tents of a dream and its stimuli, when he writes that ‘it is as though theten ﬁngers of a man who knows nothing of music were wandering overthe keys of a piano.’ [Cf. pp. 104 f. and 147.] Thus a dream is not, onthis view, a mental phenomenon based on psychical motives, but the out-come of a physiological stimulus which is expressed in psychical symp-toms because the apparatus upon which the stimulus impinges is capableof no other form of expression. A similar presupposition also underlies,for instance, the famous analogy by means of which Meynert attemptedto explain obsessive ideas: the analogy of a clock-face on which certainﬁgures stand out by being more prominently embossed than the rest.
1
However popular the theory of the somatic stimulation of dreams may
have become and however attractive it may seem, its weak point is easilydisplayed. Every somatic dream-stimulus which requires the sleeping men-tal apparatus to interpret it by the construction of an illusion may give riseto an unlimited number of such attempts at interpretation—that is to say,it may be represented in the content of the dream by an immense varietyof ideas.
2But the theory put forward by Strümpell and Wundt is incapable243 C. Somatic Sources
1 [This has not been traced in Meynert’s published writings.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] Mourly Vold [1910–12] has produced a two-volume
work containing detailed and precise reports of a series of experimentally pro-
duced dreams. [Cf. pp. 70.] I should recommend a study of this work to anyonewho wishes to convince himself of how little light is thrown on the content ofindividual dreams by the conditions of the experiments described in it and ofhow little help in general is afforded by such experiments towards an under-standing of the problems of dreams. [See, however, p. 204 n.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 243of producing any motive governing the relation between an external stim-
ulus and the dream-idea chosen for its interpretation—is incapable, that is,of explaining what Lipps (1883, 170) describes as the ‘remarkable choiceoften made’ by these stimuli ‘in the course of their productive activity.’ Ob-jections have further been raised against the presupposition upon which thewhole theory of illusion is based—the presupposition that the sleepingmind is incapable of recognizing the true nature of objective sensory stim-uli. Burdach, the physiologist, showed us long ago that even in sleep themind is very well able to interpret correctly the sense impressions that reachit and to react in accordance with that correct interpretation; for he recalledthe fact that particular sense impressions which seem important to thesleeper can be excepted from the general neglect to which such impressionsare subjected during sleep (as in the case of a nursing mother or wet-nurseand her charge), and that a sleeper is much more certain to be woken bythe sound of his own name than by any indifferent auditory impression—all of which implies that the mind distinguishes between sensations duringsleep (cf. pp. 82). Burdach went on to infer from these observations thatwhat we must presume during the state of sleep is not an incapacity to in-
terpret sensory stimuli but a lack of interest in them. The same arguments
which were used by Burdach in 1830 were brought forward once morewithout any modiﬁcations by Lipps in 1883 in his criticism of the theoryof somatic stimulation. Thus the mind seems to behave like the sleeper inthe anecdote. When someone asked him if he was asleep, he replied ‘No.’But when his questioner went on to say: ‘Then lend me ten ﬂorins,’ he tookrefuge in a subterfuge and replied: ‘I’m asleep.’
The inadequacy of the theory of the somatic stimulation of dreams
can be demonstrated in other ways. Observation shows that externalstimuli do not necessarily compel me to dream, even though such stimuliappear in the content of my dream when and if I do dream. Supposing,let us say, that I am subjected to a tactile stimulus while I am asleep. A va-riety of different reactions are then open to me. I may disregard it, andwhen I wake up I may ﬁnd, for instance, that my leg is uncovered or thatthere is some pressure on my arm; pathology provides very numerous in-stances in which various powerfully exciting sensory and motor stimulican remain without effect during sleep. Or again, I may be aware of thesensation in my sleep—I may be aware of it, as one might say, ‘through’my sleep—(which is what happens as a rule in the case of painful stimuli)but without my weaving the pain into a dream. And thirdly, I may react244 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 244to the stimulus by waking up so as to get rid of it.1It is only as a fourth
possibility that the nervous stimulus may cause me to dream. Yet the
other possibilities are realized at least as frequently as this last one of con-structing a dream. And this could not happen unless the motive fordreaming lay elsewhere than in somatic sources of stimulation.
Certain other writers—Scherner [1861] and Volkelt [1875], the phi -
los opher, who adopted Scherner’s views—formed a just estimate of thegaps which I have here indicated in the explanation of dreams as beingdue to somatic stimulation. These writers attempted to deﬁne more pre-cisely the mental activities which lead to the production of such varie-gated dream-images from the somatic stimuli; in other words, theysought to regard dreaming once again as something essentially mental—
as a psychical activity. [Cf. pp. 109 ff.] Scherner did not merely depict thepsychical characteristics unfolded in the production of dreams in termscharged with poetic feeling and glowing with life; he believed, too, thathe had discovered the principle according to which the mind deals withthe stimuli presented to it. On his view, the dream-work, when the imag-ination is set free from the shackles of daytime, seeks to give a symbolic
representation of the nature of the organ from which the stimulus arisesand of the nature of the stimulus itself. Thus he provides a kind of‘dream-book’ to serve as a guide to the interpretation of dreams, whichmakes it possible to deduce from the dream-images inferences as to thesomatic feelings, the state of the organs and the character of the stimuliconcerned. ‘Thus the image of a cat expresses a state of angry ill-temper,and the image of a smooth and lightly-coloured loaf of bread stands forphysical nudity.’ [Volkelt, 1875, 32.] The human body as a whole is pic-tured by the dream-imagination as a house and the separate organs of thebody by portions of a house. In ‘dreams with a dental stimulus,’ an en-trance-hall with a high, vaulted roof corresponds to the oral cavity and astaircase to the descent from the throat to the oesophagus. ‘In dreams dueto headaches, the top of the head is represented by the ceiling of a roomcovered with disgusting, toad-like spiders.’ [Ibid., 33 f.] A variety of suchsymbols are employed by dreams to represent the same organ. ‘Thus the245 C. Somatic Sources
1 [Footnote added 1919:] Cf. Landauer (1918) on behaviour during sleep. Anyone
can observe persons asleep carrying out actions which obviously have a meaning.
A man asleep is not reduced to complete idiocy; on the contrary, he is capableof logical and deliberate acts.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 245breathing lung will be symbolically represented by a blazing furnace, with
ﬂames roaring with a sound like the passage of air; the heart will be rep-resented by hollow boxes, or baskets, the bladder by round, bag-shapedobjects or, more generally, by hollow ones.’ [Ibid., 34.] ‘It is of special im-portance that at the end of a dream the organ concerned or its functionis often openly revealed, and as a rule in relation to the dreamer’s ownbody. Thus a dream with a dental stimulus usually ends by the dreamerpicturing himself pulling a tooth out of his mouth.’ [Ibid., 35.]
This theory of dream-interpretation cannot be said to have been very
favourably received by other writers on the subject. Its main feature seemsto be its extravagance; and there has even been hesitation in recognizingsuch justiﬁcation as, in my opinion, it can lay claim to. As will have beenseen, it involves a revival of dream-interpretation by means of symbolism—
the same method that was employed in antiquity, except that the ﬁeld fromwhich interpretations are collected is restricted within the limits of the hu-man body. Its lack of any technique of interpreting that can be grasped sci-entiﬁcally must greatly narrow the application of Scherner’s theory. Itseems to leave the door open to arbitrary interpretations, especially as in itscase, too, the same stimulus can be represented in the dream-content in avariety of different ways. Thus even Scherner’s disciple, Vol kelt, foundhimself unable to conﬁrm the view that the body was represented by ahouse. Objections are also bound to arise from the fact that once again themind is saddled with the dream-work as a useless and aimless function; for,according to the theory we are discussing, the mind is content with makingphantasies about the stimulus with which it is occupied, without the re-motest hint at anything in the nature of disposing of the stimulus.
There is one particular criticism, however, which is gravely damaging
to Scherner’s theory of the symbolization of somatic stimuli. These stimuliare present at all times and it is generally held that the mind is more acces-sible to them during sleep than when it is awake. It is difﬁcult to under-stand, then, why the mind does not dream continuously all through thenight, and, indeed, dream every night of all the organs. An attempt maybe made to avoid this criticism by adding the further condition that in or-der to arouse dream-activity it is necessary for special excitations to proceed
from the eyes, ears, teeth, intestines, etc. But the difﬁculty then arises ofproving the objective nature of such increases of stimulus—which is onlypossible in a small number of cases. If dreams of ﬂying are a symbolizationof the rising and sinking of the lobes of the lungs [cf. p. 69], then, asStrümpell [1877, 119] has already pointed out, either such dreams would246 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 246have to be much more frequent than they are or it would be necessary to
prove an increase in the activity of breathing in the course of them. Thereis a third possibility, which is the most probable of all, namely that specialmotives may be temporarily operative which direct the attention to visceralsensations that are uniformly present at all times. This possibility, however,carries us beyond the scope of Scherner’s theory.
The value of the views put forward by Scherner and Volkelt lies in the
fact that they draw attention to a number of characteristics of the contentof dreams which call for explanation and seem to promise fresh discoveries.It is perfectly true that dreams contain symbolizations of bodily organsand functions, that water in a dream often points to a urinary stimulus, andthat the male genitals can be represented by an upright stick or a pillar, andso on. In the case of dreams in which the ﬁeld of vision is full of movementand bright colours, in contrast to the drabness of other dreams, it isscarcely possible not to interpret them as ‘dreams with a visual stimulus’;nor can one dispute the part played by illusions in the case of dreams char-acterized by noise and a confusion of voices. Scherner [1861, 167] reportsa dream of two rows of pretty, fair-haired boys standing opposite eachother on a bridge, and of their attacking each other and then going backto their original position, till at last the dreamer saw himself sitting downon a bridge and pulling a long tooth out of his jaw. Similarly Volkelt[1875, 52] reports a dream in which two rows of drawers in a cupboardplayed a part and which once more ended with the dreamer pulling out atooth. Dream-formations such as these, which are recorded in great num-bers by the two authors, forbid our dismissing Scherner’s theory as an idleinvention without looking for its kernel of truth. [See p. 360.] The task,then, that faces us is to ﬁnd an explanation of another kind for the sup-posed symbolization of what is alleged to be a dental stimulus.
1
Throughout the whole of this discussion of the theory of the somatic
sources of dreams I have refrained from making use of the argument basedupon my dream-analyses. If it can be proved, by a procedure which otherwriters have not employed upon their dream-material, that dreams possessa value of their own as psychical acts, that wishes are the motive for theirconstruction and that experiences of the preceding day provide the imme-diate material for their content, then any other theory of dreams, which247 C. Somatic Sources
1 [These dreams are further considered on pp. 395 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 247neglects so important a procedure of research and accordingly represents
dreams as a useless and puzzling psychical reaction to somatic stimuli,stands condemned without there being any necessity for speciﬁc criticisms.Otherwise—and this seems highly improbable—there would have to betwo quite different kinds of dreaming, one of which has come only undermyobservation and the other only under that of the earlier authorities. All
that remains, therefore, is to ﬁnd a place in my theory of dreams for thefacts upon which the current theory of the somatic stimulation of dreamsis based.
We have already taken the ﬁrst step in this direction by advancing the
thesis (see pp. 201 f.) that the dream-work is under the necessity of combin-ing into a unity all instigations to dreaming which are active simultaneously.We found that, when two or more experiences capable of creating an im-pression are left over from the previous day, the wishes derived from themare combined in a single dream, and similarly that the psychically signiﬁcantimpression and the indifferent experiences from the previous day arebrought together in the dream-material, provided always that it is possibleto set up communicating ideas between them. Thus a dream appears to bea reaction to everything that is simultaneously present in the sleeping mindas currently active material. So far as we have hitherto analysed the materialof dreams, we have seen it as a collection of psychical residues and memory-traces, to which (on account of the preference shown for recent and infantilematerial) we have been led to attribute a hitherto indeﬁnable quality of being‘currently active.’ We can foresee, then, without any great difﬁculty, whatwill happen if fresh material in the form of sensations is added during sleepto these currently active memories. It is once again owing to the fact of theirbeing currently active that these sensory excitations are of importance for thedream; they are united with the other currently active psychical material tofurnish what is used for the construction of the dream. To put it anotherway, stimuli arising during sleep are worked up into a wish-fulﬁlment theother constituents of which are the familiar psychical ‘day’s residues.’ Thiscombination need not occur; as I have already pointed out, there is more
than one way of reacting to a somatic stimulus during sleep. When it does
occur, it means that it has been possible to ﬁnd ideational material to serveas the content of the dream of such a sort as to be able to represent bothkinds of source of the dream—the somatic and the psychical.
The essential nature of the dream is not altered by the fact of somatic
material being added to its psychical sources: a dream remains the fulﬁlment248 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 248of a wish, no matter in what way the expression of that wish- fulﬁlment is
determined by the currently active material.
I am prepared to leave room at this point for the operation of a num-
ber of special factors which can lend a varying importance to externalstimuli in relation to dreams. As I picture it, a combination of individualfactors, physiological and accidental, produced by the circumstances ofthe moment, is what determines how a person shall behave in particularcases of comparatively intense objective stimulation during sleep. The habitual or accidental depth of his sleep, taken in conjunction with theintensity of the stimulus, will make it possible in one case for him to sup-press the stimulus so that his sleep is not interrupted and in another casewill compel him to wake up or will encourage an attempt to overcomethe stimulus by weaving it into a dream. In accordance with these variouspossible combinations, external objective stimuli will ﬁnd expression indreams with greater or less frequency in one person than in another. Inmy own case, since I am an excellent sleeper and obstinately refuse to al-low anything to disturb my sleep, it very rarely happens that externalcauses of excitation ﬁnd their way into my dreams; whereas psychical mo-tives obviously cause me to dream very easily. In fact I have only noted asingle dream in which an objective and painful source of stimulus is rec-ognizable; and it will be most instructive to examine the effect which theexternal stimulus produced in this particular dream.
I was riding on a grey horse, timidly and awkwardly to begin with, as
though I were only reclining upon it. I met one of my colleagues, P ., who wassitting high on a horse, dressed in a tweed suit, and who drew my attentionto something (probably to my bad seat). I now began to ﬁnd myself sittingmore and more ﬁrmly and comfortably on my highly intelligent horse, andnoticed that I was feeling quite at home up there. My saddle was a kind ofbolster, which completely ﬁlled the space between its neck and crupper. In thisway I rode straight in between two vans. After riding some distance up thestreet, I turned round and tried to dismount, ﬁrst in front of a small openchapel that stood in the street frontage. Then I actually did dismount in frontof another chapel that stood near it. My hotel was in the same street; I mighthave let the horse go to it on its own, but I preferred to lead it there. It wasas though I should have felt ashamed to arrive at it on horseback. A hotel‘boots’ was standing in front of the hotel; he showed me a note of mine thathad been found, and laughed at me over it. In the note was written, doubly249 C. Somatic Sources9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 249underlined: ‘No food’ and then another remark (indistinct) such as ‘No
work,’ together with a vague idea that I was in a strange town in which I
was doing no work .
It would not be supposed at ﬁrst sight that this dream originated un-
der the inﬂuence, or rather under the compulsion, of a painful stimulus.But for some days before I had been suffering from boils which madeevery movement a torture; and ﬁnally a boil the size of an apple had risenat the base of my scrotum, which caused me the most unbearable painwith every step I took. Feverish lassitude, loss of appetite and the hardwork with which I nevertheless carried on—all these had combined withthe pain to depress me. I was not properly capable of discharging mymedical duties. There was, however, one activity for which, in view of thenature and situation of my complaint, I should certainly have been lessﬁtted than for any other, and that was—riding. And this was precisely theactivity in which the dream landed me: it was the most energetic denialof my illness that could possibly be imagined. I cannot in fact ride, norhave I, apart from this, had dreams of riding. I have only sat on a horseonce in my life and that was without a saddle, and I did not enjoy it. Butin this dream I was riding as though I had no boil on my perineum—orrather because I wanted not to have one. My saddle, to judge from its de-
scription, was the poultice which had made it possible for me to fallasleep. Under its assuaging inﬂuence I had probably been unaware of mypain during the ﬁrst hours of sleep. The painful feelings had then an-nounced themselves and sought to wake me; whereupon the dream cameand said soothingly: ‘No! Go on sleeping! There’s no need to wake up.You haven’t got a boil; for you’re riding on a horse, and it’s quite certainthat you couldn’t ride if you had a boil in that particular place.’ And thedream was successful. The pain was silenced, and I went on sleeping.
But the dream was not content with ‘suggesting away’ my boil by ob-
stinately insisting upon an idea that was inconsistent with it and so be-having like the hallucinatory delusion of the mother who had lost herchild or the merchant whose losses had robbed him of his fortune.
1The
details of the sensation which was being repudiated and of the picturewhich was employed in order to repress that sensation also served the250 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 Cf. the passage in Griesinger [1861, 106, referred to on pp. 116] and my re-
marks in my second paper on the neuro-psychoses of defence (Freud, 1896 b).
[Actually the reference seems to be to a paragraph near the end of Freud’s ﬁrst
paper on that subject (Freud, 1894 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 250dream as a means of connecting other material that was currently active
in my mind with the situation in the dream and of giving that material
representation. I was riding on a greyhorse, whose colour corresponded
precisely to the pepper-and-salt colour of the suit my colleague P . was
wearing when I had last met him in the country. The cause of my boilshad been ascribed to my eating highly-spiced food—an aetiology that was
at least preferable to the sugar [diabetes] which might also occur to one
in connection with boils. My friend P . liked to ride the high horse over
me ever since he had taken over one of my women patients on whom Ihad pulled off some remarkable feats. (In the dream I began by riding
 tangentially—like the featof a trick-rider.) But in fact, like the horse in
the anecdote of the Sunday horseman,
1this patient had taken me wher-
ever she felt inclined. Thus the horse acquired the symbolic meaning of awoman patient. (It was highly intelligent in the dream.) ‘ I felt quite at home
up there’ referred to the position I had occupied in this patient’s house be-fore I was replaced by P . Not long before, one of my few patrons amongthe leading physicians in this city had remarked to me in connection withthis same house: ‘You struck me as being ﬁrmly in the saddle there.’ It wasa remarkable feat, too, to be able to carry on my psychotherapeutic workfor eight or ten hours a day while I was having so much pain. But I knewthat I could not go on long with my peculiarly difﬁcult work unless I wasin completely sound physical health; and my dream was full of gloomyallusions to the situation in which I should then ﬁnd myself. (The note
which neurasthenics bring with them to show the doctor; no work, no
food.) In the course of further interpretation I saw that the dream-work
had succeeded in ﬁnding a path from the wishful situation of riding tosome scenes of quarrelling from my very early childhood which musthave occurred between me and a nephew of mine, a year my senior, whowas at present living in England. [Cf. pp. 433 f.] Furthermore, the dreamhad derived some of its elements from my travels in Italy: the street in thedream was composed of impressions of Verona and Siena. A still deeperinterpretation led to sexual dream-thoughts, and I recalled the meaningwhich references to Italy seem to have had in the dreams of a woman pa-tient who had never visited that lovely country: ‘ gen Italien [to Italy]’—
‘Genitalien [genitals]’; and this was connected, too, with the house in251 C. Somatic Sources
1 [In a letter to Fliess of July 7, 1898 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 92), Freud describes
‘the famous principle of Itzig, the Sunday horseman: “Itzig, where are you riding
to?”—“Don’t ask me! Ask the horse!”’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 251which I had preceded my friend P . as physician, as well as with the situa-
tion of my boil.
In another dream1I similarly succeeded in warding off a threatened
interruption of my sleep which came this time from a sensory stimulus.In this case it was only by chance, however, that I was able to discover thelink between the dream and its accidental stimulus and thus to under-stand the dream. One morning at the height of summer, while I was stay-ing at a mountain resort in the Tyrol, I woke up knowing I had had adream that the Pope was dead. I failed to interpret this dream—a non-
 visual one—and only remembered as part of its basis that I had read in anewspaper a short time before that his Holiness was suffering from aslight indisposition. In the course of the morning, however, my wifeasked me if I had heard the frightful noise made by the pealing of bellsthat morning. I had been quite unaware of them, but I now understoodmy dream. It had been a reaction on the part of my need for sleep to thenoise with which the pious Tyrolese had been trying to wake me. I hadtaken my revenge on them by drawing the inference which formed thecontent of the dream, and I had then continued my sleep without payingany more attention to the noise.
The dreams quoted in earlier chapters included several which might
serve as instances of the working-over of such so-called nervous stimuli.My dream of drinking water in great gulps [p. 148] is an example. The so-matic stimulus was apparently its only source, and the wish derived fromthe sensation (the thirst, that is) was apparently its only motive. The caseis similar with other simple dreams in which a somatic stimulus seems ableby itself to construct a wish. The dream of the woman patient who threwoff the cooling apparatus from her cheek during the night [pp. 150 f.]presents an unusual method of reacting to a painful stimulus with a wish-fulﬁlment: it appears as though the patient succeeded temporarily in mak-ing herself analgesic, while ascribing her pains to someone else.
My dream of the three Fates [pp. 225 ff.] was clearly a hunger dream.
But it succeeded in shifting the craving for nourishment back to a child’slonging for his mother’s breast, and it made use of an innocent desire as252 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [This paragraph was added in 1914. The dream had already been very brieﬂy
recorded in Freud, 1913 h(No. 1); it will also be found in Lecture V of Freud,
1916–17.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 252a screen for a more serious one which could not be so openly displayed.
My dream about Count Thun [pp. 231 ff.] showed how an accidentalphysical need can be linked up with the most intense (but at the sametime the most intensely suppressed) mental impulses. And a case such asthat related by Garnier (1872, 1, 476) of how the First Consul wove the
noise of an exploding bomb into a battle dream before he woke up fromit [p. 58 f.] reveals with quite special clarity the nature of the sole motivethat leads mental activity to concern itself with sensations during sleep. Ayoung barrister,
1fresh from his ﬁrst important bankruptcy proceedings,
who dropped asleep one afternoon, behaved in just the same way as thegreat Napoleon. He had a dream of a certain G. Reich of Husyatin [a
town in Galicia] whom he had come across during a bankruptcy case; thename ‘Husyatin’ kept on forcing itself on his notice, till he woke up andfound that his wife (who was suffering from a bronchial catarrh) was hav-ing a violent ﬁt of coughing [in German ‘ husten ’].
Let us compare this dream of the ﬁrst Napoleon (who, incidentally,
was an extremely sound sleeper) with that of the sleepy student who wasroused by his landlady and told that it was time to go to the hospital, andwho proceeded to dream that he was in bed at the hospital and then slepton, under the pretext that as he was already in the hospital there was noneed for him to get up and go there [p. 150]. This latter dream wasclearly a dream of convenience. The dreamer admitted his motive fordreaming without any disguise; but at the same time he gave away one ofthe secrets of dreaming in general. All dreams are in a sense dreams ofconvenience: they serve the purpose of prolonging sleep instead of wakingup. Dreams are the guardians of sleep and not its disturbers. We shall have
occasion elsewhere to justify this view of them in relation to awakeningfactors of a psychical kind [see below pp. 577]; but we are already in a po-
sition to show that it is applicable to the part played by objective externalstimuli. Either the mind pays no attention at all to occasions for sensationduring sleep—if it is able to do this despite the intensity of the stimuliand the signiﬁcance which it knows attaches to them; or it makes use ofa dream in order to deny the stimuli; or, thirdly, if it is obliged to recog-nize them, it seeks for an interpretation of them which will make the cur-rently active sensation into a component part of a situation which iswished for and which is consistent with sleeping. The currently active253 C. Somatic Sources
1 [This sentence and the next were added in 1909.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 253sensation is woven into a dream in order to rob it of reality. Napoleon
could sleep on—with a conviction that what was trying to disturb him
was only a dream-memory of the thunder of the guns at Arcole.1
Thus the wish to sleep (which the conscious ego is concentrated upon, and
which, together with the dream-censorship and the ‘secondary revision’ whichI shall mention later [pp. 493 ff.], constitute the conscious ego’s share in
dreaming) must in every case be reckoned as one of the motives for the forma-tion of dreams, and every successful dream is a fulﬁlment of that wish .
2We
shall discuss elsewhere [pp. 570 ff.] the relations subsisting between thisuniversal, invariably present and unchanging wish to sleep and the otherwishes, of which now one and now another is fulﬁlled by the content ofthe dream. But we have found in the wish to sleep the factor that is ableto ﬁll the gap in the theory of Strümpell and Wundt [pp. 243 f.] and toexplain the perverse and capricious manner in which external stimuli areinterpreted. The correct interpretation, which the sleeping mind is per-fectly capable of making, would involve an active interest and would re-quire that sleep should be brought to an end; for that reason, of all thepossible interpretations, only those are admitted which are consistent withthe absolute censorship exercised by the wish to sleep. ‘It is the nightingaleand not the lark.’ For if it were the lark it would mean the end of thelovers’ night. Among the interpretations of the stimulus which are accord-ingly admissible, that one is then selected which can provide the best linkwith the wishful impulses lurking in the mind. Thus everything is unam-biguously determined and nothing is left to arbitrary decision. The misin-terpretation is not an illusion but, as one might say, an evasion. Here onceagain, however, just as when, in obedience to the dream-censorship, a sub-stitution is effected by displacement, we have to admit that we are facedby an act which deviates from normal psychical processes.
When external nervous stimuli and internal somatic stimuli are in-
tense enough to force psychical attention to themselves, then—provided254 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 The two sources from which I know this dream do not agree in their account of
it.
2 [The portion of this sentence in parentheses was not included in the ﬁrst or sec-
ond edition (1900 and 1909). The phrase ‘which the conscious ego is concen-
trated upon, and which, together with the dream-censorship, constitute theconscious ego’s contribution to dreaming’ was added in 1911. The phrase ‘andthe “secondary revision” which we shall mention later’ was added as a footnotein 1914 and incorporated in the text in 1930.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 254that their outcome is dreaming and not waking up—they serve as a ﬁxed
point for the formation of a dream, a nucleus in its material; a wish-
 fulﬁlment is then looked for that shall correspond to this nucleus, just as(see above, pp. 248) intermediate ideas are looked for between two psy-chical dream-stimuli. To that extent it is true that in a number of dreamsthe content of the dream is dictated by the somatic element. In this ex-treme instance it may even happen that a wish which is not actually a cur-rently active one is called up for the sake of constructing a dream. Adream, however, has no alternative but to represent a wish in the situationof having been fulﬁlled; it is, as it were, faced with the problem of lookingfor a wish which can be represented as fulﬁlled by the currently active sen-sation. If this immediate material is of a painful or distressing kind, thatdoes not necessarily mean that it cannot be used for the construction of adream. The mind has wishes at its disposal whose fulﬁlment produces un-pleasure. This seems self-contradictory; but it becomes intelligible whenwe take into account the presence of two psychical agencies and a censor-ship between them.
As we have seen, there are ‘repressed’ wishes in the mind, which be-
long to the ﬁrst system and whose fulﬁlment is opposed by the secondsystem. In saying that there are such wishes I am not making a historicalstatement to the effect that they once existed and were later abolished.The theory of repression, which is essential to the study of the psycho -neuroses, asserts that these repressed wishes stillexist—though there is a
simultaneous inhibition which holds them down. Linguistic usage hitsthe mark in speaking of the ‘suppression’ [i.e. the ‘pressing down’] ofthese impulses. The psychical arrangements that make it possible for suchimpulses to force their way to realization remain in being and in workingorder. Should it happen, however, that a suppressed wish of this kind iscarried into effect, and that its inhibition by the second system (the sys-tem that is admissible to consciousness) is defeated, this defeat ﬁnds ex-pression as unpleasure. In conclusion: if sensations of an unpleasurablenature arising from somatic sources occur during sleep, the dream-workmakes use of that event in order to represent—subject to the continuanceof the censorship to a greater or less degree—the fulﬁlment of some wishwhich is normally suppressed.
1255 C. Somatic Sources
1 [This whole subject is further discussed in Section C of Chapter VII; see espe-
cially pp. 557 ff. Cf. also pp. 284 and 492.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 255This state of affairs is what makes possible one group of anxiety-
dreams—dream-structures unpropitious from the point of view of the
wish-theory. A second group of them reveal a different mechanism; foranxiety in dreams may be psychoneurotic anxiety: it may originate frompsychosexual excitations—in which case the anxiety corresponds to re-pressed libido. Where this is so, the anxiety, like the whole anxiety-dream,has the signiﬁcance of a neurotic symptom, and we come near the limit atwhich the wish-fulﬁlling purpose of dreams breaks down. [See pp. 183 ff.and 579 ff.] But there are some anxiety-dreams [—those of the ﬁrstgroup—] in which the feeling of anxiety is determined somatically—where, for instance, there happens to be difﬁculty in breathing owing todisease of the lungs or heart—and in such cases the anxiety is exploited inorder to assist the fulﬁlment in the form of dreams of energetically sup-pressed wishes which, if they had been dreamt about for psychical reasons,
would have led to a similar release of anxiety. But there is no difﬁculty inreconciling these two apparently different groups. In both groups ofdreams two psychical factors are involved: an inclination towards an affectand an ideational content; and these are intimately related to each other. Ifone of them is currently active, it calls up the other even in a dream; in theone case the somatically determined anxiety calls up the suppressed idea -tional content, and in the other the ideational content with its accompa-nying sexual excitation, having been set free from repression, calls up arelease of anxiety. We can put it that in the ﬁrst case a somatically deter-mined affect is given a psychical interpretation; while in the other case,though the whole is psychically determined, the content which had beensuppressed is easily replaced by a somatic interpretation appropriate to anx-iety. The difﬁculties which all this offers to our understanding have littleto do with dreams: they arise from the fact that we are here touching onthe problem of the generation of anxiety and on the problem of  repression.
There can be no doubt that physical coenaesthesia [or diffuse general
sensibility, see p. 66 f.] is among the internal somatic stimuli which candictate the content of dreams. It can do so, not in the sense that it can pro-vide the dream’s content, but in the sense that it can force upon thedream-thoughts a choice of the material to be represented in the contentby putting forward one part of the material as being appropriate to its owncharacter and by holding back another part. Apart from this, the coenaes-thetic feelings left over from the preceding day link themselves up, nodoubt, with the psychical residues which have such an important inﬂuenceon dreams. This general mood may persist unchanged in the dream or it256 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 256may be mastered, and thus, if it is unpleasurable, may be changed into its
opposite.1
Thus, in my opinion, somatic sources of stimulation during sleep (that
is to say, sensations during sleep), unless they are of unusual intensity, playa similar part in the formation of dreams to that played by recent but in-different impressions left over from the previous day. I believe, that is, thatthey are brought in to help in the formation of a dream if they ﬁt in ap-propriately with the ideational content derived from the dream’s psychicalsources, but otherwise not. They are treated like some cheap material al-ways ready to hand, which is employed whenever it is needed, in contrastto a precious material which itself prescribes the way in which it shall beemployed. If, to take a simile, a patron of the arts brings an artist some rarestone, such as a piece of onyx, and asks him to create a work of art from it,then the size of the stone, its colour and markings, help to decide whathead or what scene shall be represented in it. Whereas in the case of a uni-form and plentiful material such as marble or sandstone, the artist merelyfollows some idea that is present in his own mind. It is only in this way, soit seems to me, that we can explain the fact that dream-content providedby somatic stimuli of no unusual intensity fails to appear in every dreamor every night. [Cf. pp. 246.]
2
I can perhaps best illustrate my meaning by an example, which, more-
over, will bring us back to dream-interpretation.
One day I had been trying to discover what might be the meaning of
the feelings of being inhibited, of being glued to the spot, of not beingable to get something done, and so on, which occur so often in dreamsand are so closely akin to feelings of anxiety. That night I had the follow-ing dream:
I was very incompletely dressed and was going upstairs from a ﬂat on the
ground ﬂoor to a higher storey. I was going up three steps at a time and wasdelighted at my agility. Suddenly I saw a maid-servant coming down thestairs—coming towards me, that is. I felt ashamed and tried to hurry, and at257 C. Somatic Sources
1 [Cf. pp. 492 ff.—This last sentence was added in 1914.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] Rank has shown in a number of papers [1910, 1912 aand
1912b ] that certain arousal dreams produced by organic stimuli (dreams with a
urinary stimulus and dreams of emission or orgasm) are especially suited to dem-
onstrate the struggle between the need to sleep and the claims of organic needs,as well as the inﬂuence of the latter upon the content of dreams. [See pp. 412 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 257this point the feeling of being inhibited set in: I was glued to the steps and un-
able to budge from the spot .
Analysis.—The situation in the dream is taken from everyday reality.
I occupy two ﬂats in a house in Vienna, which are connected only by thepublic staircase. My consulting-room and study are on the upper groundﬂoor and my living rooms are one storey higher. When, late in the eve -
ning, I have ﬁnished my work down below, I go up the stairs to my bed-room. On the evening before I had the dream, I had in fact made thisshort journey in rather disordered dress—that is to say, I had taken off mycollar and tie and cuffs. In the dream this had been turned into a higherdegree of undress, but, as usual, an indeterminate one. [Cf. p. 263.] I usu-ally go upstairs two or three steps at a time; and this was recognized in thedream itself as a wish-fulﬁlment: the ease with which I achieved it re -assured me as to the functioning of my heart. Further, this method of go-ing upstairs was an effective contrast to the inhibition in the second halfof the dream. It showed me—what needed no proving—that dreams ﬁndno difﬁculty in representing motor acts carried out to perfection. (Oneneed only recall dreams of ﬂying.)
The staircase up which I was going, however, was not the one in my
house. At ﬁrst I failed to recognize it and it was only the identity of theperson who met me that made it clear to me what locality was intended.This person was the maid-servant of the old lady whom I was visitingtwice a day in order to give her injections [cf. p. 142]; and the staircase,too, was just like the one in her house which I had to go up twice a day.
Now how did this staircase and this female ﬁgure come to be in my
dream? The feeling of shame at not being completely dressed is no doubtof a sexual nature; but the maid-servant whom I dreamt about was olderthan I am, surly and far from attractive. The only answer to the problemthat occurred to me was this. When I paid my morning visits to this houseI used as a rule to be seized with a desire to clear my throat as I went up thestairs and the product of my expectoration would fall on the staircase. Foron neither of these ﬂoors was there a spittoon; and the view I took was thatthe cleanliness of the stairs should not be maintained at my expense butshould be made possible by the provision of a spittoon. The concierge, anequally elderly and surly woman (but of cleanly instincts, as I was preparedto admit), looked at the matter in a different light. She would lie in wait forme to see whether I should again make free of the stairs, and, if she foundthat I did, I used to hear her grumbling audibly; and for several days after-wards she would omit the usual greeting when we met. The day before I258 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 258had the dream the concierge’s party had received a reinforcement in the
shape of the maid-servant. I had, as usual, concluded my hurried visit tothe patient, when the servant stopped me in the hall and remarked: ‘Youmight have wiped your boots, doctor, before you came into the room today.You’ve made the red carpet all dirty again with your feet.’ This was the onlyclaim the staircase and the maid-servant had to appearing in my dream.
There was an internal connection between my running up the stairs
and my spitting on the stairs. Pharyngitis as well as heart trouble are bothregarded as punishments for the vice of smoking. And on account of thathabit my reputation for tidiness was not of the highest with the authori-ties in my own house any more than in the other; so that the two werefused into one in the dream.
I must postpone my further interpretation of this dream till I can ex-
plain the origin of the typical dream of being incompletely dressed. I willonly point out as a provisional conclusion to be drawn from the presentdream that a sensation of inhibited movement in dreams is producedwhenever the particular context requires it. The cause of this part of thedream’s content cannot have been that some special modiﬁcation in mypowers of movement had occurred during my sleep, since only a momentearlier I had seen myself (almost as though to conﬁrm this fact) runningnimbly up the stairs.
1
(D)
TYPICAL DREAMS
We are not in general in a position to interpret another person’s dream
unless he is prepared to communicate to us the unconscious thoughts thatlie behind its content. The practical applicability of our method of inter-preting dreams is in consequence severely restricted.
2We have seen that,
as a general rule, each person is at liberty to construct his dream-world according to his individual peculiarities and so to make it unintelligible to259 D. Typical Dreams
1 [The feeling of inhibition in dreams is discussed at length on pp. 350 ff. The
present dream is further analysed on pp. 265 f. It was reported in a letter to
Fliess of May 31, 1897. (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 64.)]
2 [Footnote added 1925:] This assertion that our method of interpreting dreams
cannot be applied unless we have access to the dreamer’s associative material re-quires supplementing: our interpretative activity is in one instance independent9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 259other people. It now appears, however, that, in complete contrast to this,
there are a certain number of dreams which almost everyone has dreamtalike and which we are accustomed to assume must have the same mean-ing for everyone. A special interest attaches, moreover, to these typicaldreams because they presumably arise from the same sources in every caseand thus seem particularly well qualiﬁed to throw light on the sources ofdreams.
It is therefore with quite particular anticipations that we shall attempt
to apply our technique of dream-interpretation to these typical dreams;and it is with great reluctance that we shall have to confess that our artdisappoints our expectations precisely in relation to this material. If weattempt to interpret a typical dream, the dreamer fails as a rule to producethe associations which would in other cases have led us to understand it,or else his associations become obscure and insufﬁcient so that we cannotsolve our problem with their help. We shall learn in a later portion of thiswork [Section E of Chapter VI, pp. 363 ff.] why this is so and how wecan make up for this defect in our technique. My readers will also dis-cover why it is that at the present point I am able to deal only with a fewmembers of the group of typical dreams and must postpone my consid-eration of the rest until this later point in my discussion. [See pp. 394 ff.]
1
(α) Embarrassing Dreams of Being Naked
Dreams of being naked or insufﬁciently dressed in the presence of
strangers sometimes occur with the additional feature of there being acomplete absence of any such feeling as shame on the dreamer’s part. We260 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
of these associations—if, namely, the dreamer has employed symbolic elements
in the content of the dream. In such cases we make use of what is, strictly speak-
ing, a second and auxiliary method of dream-interpretation. (See below [pp. 371f.].) [In the edition of 1911 only, the following footnote appeared at this point:‘Apart from cases in which the dreamer makes use of symbols which are familiarto us for the purpose of representing his latent dream-thoughts (see below).’]
1[This paragraph in its present form dates from 1914. It was in the edition of that
year (the fourth) that the section on symbolism was added to Chapter VI. Thisled to considerable alterations in the present section, much of the material inwhich was transferred to the new section. (See Editor’s Introduction, p. xiii.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 260are only concerned here, however, with those dreams of being naked in
which one does feel shame and embarrassment and tries to escape or hide,
and is then overcome by a strange inhibition which prevents one frommoving and makes one feel incapable of altering one’s distressing situa-tion. It is only with this accompaniment that the dream is typical; with-out it, the gist of its subject-matter may be included in every variety ofcontext or may be ornamented with individual trimmings. Its essence [inits typical form] lies in a distressing feeling in the nature of shame and inthe fact that one wishes to hide one’s nakedness, as a rule by locomotion,but ﬁnds one is unable to do so. I believe the great majority of my readerswill have found themselves in this situation in dreams.
The nature of the undress involved is customarily far from clear. The
dreamer may say ‘I was in my chemise,’ but this is rarely a distinct picture.The kind of undress is usually so vague that the description is expressed asan alternative: ‘I was in my chemise or petticoat.’ As a rule the defect inthe dreamer’s toilet is not so grave as to appear to justify the shame towhich it gives rise. In the case of a man who has worn the Emperor’s uni-form, nakedness is often replaced by some breach of the dress regulations:‘I was walking in the street without my sabre and saw some ofﬁcers com-ing up,’ or ‘I was without my necktie,’ or ‘I was wearing civilian checktrousers,’ and so on.
The people in whose presence one feels ashamed are almost always
strangers, with their features left indeterminate. In the typical dream itnever happens that the clothing which causes one so much embarrass-ment is objected to or so much as  noticed by the onlookers. On the con-
trary, they adopt indifferent or (as I observed in one particularly cleardream) solemn and stiff expressions of face. This is a suggestive point.
The embarrassment of the dreamer and the indifference of the onlook-
ers offer us, when taken together, a contradiction of the kind that is so com-mon in dreams. It would after all be more in keeping with the dreamer’sfeelings if strangers looked at him in astonishment and derision or with in-dignation. But this objectionable feature of the situation has, I believe, beengot rid of by wish-fulﬁlment, whereas some force has led to the retentionof the other features; and the two portions of the dream are consequentlyout of harmony with each other. We possess an interesting piece of evidencethat the dream in the form in which it appears—partly distorted by wish-fulﬁlment—has not been rightly understood. For it has become the basisof a fairy tale which is familiar to us all in Hans Andersen’s version, The261 D. Typical Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 261Emperor’s New Clothes , and which has quite recently been put into verse by
Ludwig Fulda1in his [‘dramatic fairy tale’] Der T alisman. Hans Andersen’s
fairy tale tells us how two impostors weave the Emperor a costly garment
which, they say, will be visible only to persons of virtue and loyalty. TheEmperor walks out in this invisible garment, and all the spectators, intimi-dated by the fabric’s power to act as a touchstone, pretend not to notice theEmperor’s nakedness.
This is just the situation in our dream. It is hardly rash to assume that
the unintelligibility of the dream’s content as it exists in the memory hasled to its being recast in a form designed to make sense of the situation.That situation, however, is in the process deprived of its original meaningand put to extraneous uses. But, as we shall see later, it is a common thingfor the conscious thought-activity of a second psychical system to misun-derstand the content of a dream in this way, and this misunderstandingmust be regarded as one of the factors in determining the ﬁnal form as-sumed by dreams.
2Moreover we shall learn that similar misunderstandings
(taking place, once again, within one and the same psychical personality)play a major part in the construction of obsessions and phobias.
In the case of our dream we are in a position to indicate the material
upon which the misinterpretation is based. The impostor is the dreamand the Emperor is the dreamer himself; the moralizing purpose of thedream reveals an obscure knowledge of the fact that the latent dream- content is concerned with forbidden wishes that have fallen victim to re-pression. For the context in which dreams of this sort appear during myanalyses of neurotics leaves no doubt that they are based upon memoriesfrom earliest childhood. It is only in our childhood that we are seen in in-adequate clothing both by members of our family and by strangers—nurses, maid-servants, and visitors; and it is only then that we feel noshame at our nakedness.
3We can observe how undressing has an almost
intoxicating effect on many children even in their later years, instead ofmaking them feel ashamed. They laugh and jump about and slap them-selves, while their mother, or whoever else may be there, reproves them262 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [German playwright, 1862–1939.]
2 [This process of ‘secondary revision’ forms the subject of Section I of Chapter
VI (pp. 493 ff.). Its application to this same fairy tale is discussed in a letter to
Fliess of July 7, 1897 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 66).]
3 A child plays a part in the fairy tale as well; for it was a small child who suddenly
exclaimed: ‘But he has nothing on!’9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 262and says: ‘Ugh! Shocking! You mustn’t ever do that!’ Children frequently
manifest a desire to exhibit. One can scarcely pass through a country vil-lage in our part of the world without meeting some child of two or threewho lifts up his little shirt in front of one—in one’s honour, perhaps.One of my patients has a conscious memory of a scene in his eighth year,when at bed-time he wanted to dance into the next room where his littlesister slept, dressed in his nightshirt, but was prevented by his nurse. Inthe early history of neurotics an important part is played by exposure tochildren of the opposite sex; in paranoia delusions of being observedwhile dressing and undressing are to be traced back to experiences of thiskind; while among persons who have remained at the stage of perversionthere is one class in which this infantile impulse has reached the pitch ofa symptom—the class of ‘exhibitionists.’
1
When we look back at this unashamed period of childhood it seems
to us a Paradise; and Paradise itself is no more than a group phantasy ofthe childhood of the individual. That is why mankind were naked in Par-adise and were without shame in one another’s presence; till a momentarrived when shame and anxiety awoke, expulsion followed, and sexuallife and the tasks of cultural activity began. But we can regain this Para-dise every night in our dreams. I have already [p. 239] expressed a suspi-cion that impressions of earliest childhood (that is, from the prehistoricepoch until about the end of the third year of life) strive to achieve repro-duction, from their very nature and irrespectively perhaps of their actualcontent, and that their repetition constitutes the fulﬁlment of a wish.Thus dreams of being naked are dreams of exhibiting.
2
The core of a dream of exhibiting lies in the ﬁgure of the dreamer
himself (not as he was as a child but as he appears at the present time) andhis inadequate clothing (which emerges indistinctly, whether owing to su-perimposed layers of innumerable later memories of being in undress or263 D. Typical Dreams
1 [This allusion to the perversions as remnants of infantile sexual activity foreshad-
ows Freud’s analysis of the sexual instinct in his Three Essays (1950d ).]
2 [Footnote added 1911:] Ferenczi [1910] has recorded a number of interesting
dreams of being naked dreamt by women. There was no difﬁculty in tracing
these back to the infantile desire to exhibit; but they differed in some respects
from the ‘typical’ dreams of being naked which I have discussed in the text.—[The penultimate sentence in the paragraph above seems to adumbrate some ofthe ideas put forward twenty years later in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (Freud,
1920g).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 263as a result of the censorship). Added to these are the ﬁgures of the people
in whose presence the dreamer feels ashamed. I know of no instance inwhich the actual spectators of the infantile scene of exhibiting have ap-peared in the dream; a dream is scarcely ever a simple memory. Curiouslyenough, the people upon whom our sexual interest was directed in child-hood are omitted in all the reproductions which occur in dreams, in hys-teria and in obsessional neurosis. It is only in paranoia that thesespectators reappear and, though they remain invisible, their presence isinferred with fanatical conviction. What takes their place in dreams—‘alot of strangers’ who take no notice of the spectacle that is offered—isnothing more nor less than the wishful contrary of the single familiar in-dividual before whom the dreamer exposed himself. Incidentally, ‘a lot ofstrangers’ frequently appear in dreams in many other connections, andthey always stand as the wishful contrary of ‘secrecy.’
1It is to be noticed
that even in paranoia, where the original state of things is restored, thisreversal into a contrary is observed. The subject feels that he is no longeralone, he has no doubt that he is being observed, but the observers are ‘alot of strangers’ whose identity is left curiously vague.
In addition to this, repression plays a part in dreams of exhibiting; for
the distress felt in such dreams is a reaction on the part of the second sys-tem against the content of the scene of exhibiting having found expres-sion in spite of the ban upon it. If the distress was to be avoided, the sceneshould never have been revived.
We shall return later [pp. 350 ff.] to the feeling of being inhibited. It
serves admirably in dreams to represent a conﬂict in the will or a negative.The unconscious purpose requires the exhibiting to proceed; the censor-ship demands that it shall be stopped.
There can be no doubt that the connections between our typical
dreams and fairy tales and the material of other kinds of creative writingare neither few nor accidental. It sometimes happens that the sharp eye ofa creative writer has an analytic realization of the process of transformationof which he is habitually no more than the tool. If so, he may follow theprocess in a reverse direction and so trace back the imaginative writing toa dream. One of my friends has drawn my attention to the following pas-264 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [This point is also mentioned towards the end of Freud’s paper on ‘Screen Mem-
ories’ (1899 a).—Footnote added 1909:] For obvious reasons the presence of ‘the
whole family’ in a dream has the same signiﬁcance.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 264sage in Gottfried Keller’s Der grüne Heinrich [Part III, Chapter 2]: ‘I hope,
my dear Lee, that you may never learn from your own personal experience
the peculiar and piquant truth of the plight of Odysseus when he ap-
peared, naked and covered with mud, before the eyes of Nausicaä and hermaidens! Shall I tell you how that can happen? Let us look into our exam-ple. If you are wandering about in a foreign land, far from your home andfrom all that you hold dear, if you have seen and heard many things, haveknown sorrow and care, and are wretched and forlorn, then without failyou will dream one night that you are coming near to your home; you willsee it gleaming and shining in the fairest colours, and the sweetest, dearestand most beloved forms will move towards you. Then suddenly you willbecome aware that you are in rags, naked and dusty. You will be seizedwith a nameless shame and dread, you will seek to ﬁnd covering and tohide yourself, and you will awake bathed in sweat. This, so long as menbreathe, is the dream of the unhappy wanderer; and Homer has evokedthe picture of his plight from the deepest and eternal nature of man.’
The deepest and eternal nature of man, upon whose evocation in his
hearers the poet is accustomed to rely, lies in those impulses of the mindwhich have their roots in a childhood that has since become prehistoric.Suppressed and forbidden wishes from childhood break through in thedream behind the exile’s unobjectionable wishes which are capable of en-tering consciousness; and that is why the dream which ﬁnds concrete ex-pression in the legend of Nausicaä ends as a rule as an anxiety-dream.
My own dream (recorded on p. 257 f.) of running upstairs and of soon
afterwards ﬁnding myself glued to the steps was equally a dream of exhibit-ing, since it bears the essential marks of being one. It should be possible,therefore, to trace it back to experiences during my childhood, and if thesecould be discovered they should enable us to judge how far the maid- servant’s behaviour to me—her accusing me of dirtying the  carpet—helpedto give her her place in my dream. I can, as it happens, provide the neces-sary particulars. In a psycho-analysis one learns to interpret propinquity intime as representing connection in subject-matter. [See below, p. 330.] T wothoughts which occur in immediate sequence without any apparent con-nection are in fact part of a single unity which has to be discovered; in justthe same way, if I write an ‘ a’ and a ‘b ’ in succession, they have to be pro-
nounced as a single syllable ‘ab.’ The same is true of dreams. The staircasedream to which I have referred was one of a series of dreams; and I under-stood the interpretation of the other members of the series. Since this par-ticular dream was surrounded by the others it must have dealt with the265 D. Typical Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 265same subject. Now these other dreams were based on a recollection of a
nurse in whose charge I had been from some date during my earliest in-fancy till I was two and a half. I even retain an obscure conscious memoryof her. According to what I was told not long ago by my mother, she wasold and ugly, but very sharp and efﬁcient. From what I can infer from myown dreams her treatment of me was not always excessive in its amiabilityand her words could be harsh if I failed to reach the required standard ofcleanliness. And thus the maid-servant, since she had undertaken the jobof carrying on this educational work, acquired the right to be treated in mydream as a reincarnation of the prehistoric old nurse. It is reasonable to sup-pose that the child loved the old woman who taught him these lessons, inspite of her rough treatment of him.
1
(β) Dreams of the Death of Persons of 
Whom the Dreamer is Fond
Another group of dreams which may be described as typical are those
containing the death of some loved relative—for instance, of a parent, ofa brother or sister, or of a child. T wo classes of such dreams must at oncebe distinguished: those in which the dreamer is unaffected by grief, sothat on awakening he is astonished at his lack of feeling, and those inwhich the dreamer feels deeply pained by the death and may even weepbitterly in his sleep.
We need not consider the dreams of the ﬁrst of these classes, for they
have no claim to be regarded as ‘typical.’ If we analyse them, we ﬁnd thatthey have some meaning other than their apparent one, and that they areintended to conceal some other wish. Such was the dream of the auntwho saw her sister’s only son lying in his cofﬁn. (See pp. 176 f.) It did notmean that she wished her little nephew dead; as we have seen, it merely266 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 Here is an ‘over-interpretation’ of the same dream. Since ‘spuken [haunting]’ is
an activity of spirits, ‘spucken [spitting] on the stairs’ might be loosely rendered
as ‘esprit d’escalier .’ This last phrase is equivalent to lack of ready repartee
[‘Schlagfertigkeit,’ literally ‘readiness to strike’]—a failing to which I must in fact
plead guilty. Was my nurse, I wonder, equally wanting in that quality? [This
nurse is referred to at the end of Chapter IV of The Psychopathology of Everyday
Life(Freud, 1901b) and in greater detail in his letters to Fliess of October 3 and
4 and October 15, 1897 (Freud, 1950 a, Letters 70 and 71).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 266concealed a wish to see a particular person of whom she was fond and
whom she had not met for a long time—a person whom she had once before met after a similarly long interval beside the cofﬁn of anothernephew. This wish, which was the true content of the dream, gave no oc-casion for grief, and no grief, therefore, was felt in the dream. It will benoticed that the affect felt in the dream belongs to its latent and not toits manifest content, and that the dream’s affective content has remained
untouched by the distortion which has overtaken its ideational content.
1
Very different are the dreams of the other class—those in which the
dreamer imagines the death of a loved relative and is at the same timepainfully affected. The meaning of such dreams, as their content indi-cates, is a wish that the person in question may die. And since I must ex-pect that the feelings of all of my readers and any others who haveexperienced similar dreams will rebel against my assertion, I must try tobase my evidence for it on the broadest possible foundation.
I have already discussed a dream which taught us that the wishes
which are represented in dreams as fulﬁlled are not always present-daywishes. They may also be wishes of the past which have been abandoned,overlaid and repressed, and to which we have to attribute some sort ofcontinued existence only because of their re-emergence in a dream. Theyare not dead in our sense of the word but only like the shades in theOdyssey, which awoke to some sort of life as soon as they had tastedblood. In the dream of the dead child in the ‘case’ (pp. 177 f.) what wasinvolved was a wish which had been an immediate one ﬁfteen years ear-lier and was frankly admitted as having existed at that time. I may add—and this may not be without its bearing upon the theory of dreams—thateven behind this wish there lay a memory from the dreamer’s earliestchildhood. When she was a small child—the exact date could not be ﬁxedwith certainty—she had heard that her mother had fallen into a deep de-pression during the pregnancy of which she had been the fruit and hadpassionately wished that the child she was bearing might die. When thedreamer herself was grown-up and pregnant, she merely followed hermother’s example.
If anyone dreams, with every sign of pain, that his father or mother or
brother or sister has died, I should never use the dream as evidence that267 D. Typical Dreams
1 [See the discussion on affects in dreams in Chapter VII, Section H (especially
p. 469).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 267he wishes for that person’s death at the present time. The theory of dreams
does not require as much as that; it is satisﬁed with the inference that this
death has been wished for at some time or other during the dreamer’schildhood. I fear, however, that this reservation will not appease the ob-jectors; they will deny the possibility of their everhaving had such a
thought with just as much energy as they insist that they harbour no suchwishes now. I must therefore reconstruct a portion of the vanished mentallife of children on the basis of the evidence of the present.
1
Let us ﬁrst consider the relation of children to their brothers and sis-
ters. I do not know why we presuppose that that relation must be a lovingone; for instances of hostility between adult brothers and sisters forcethemselves upon everyone’s experience and we can often establish the factthat the disunity originated in childhood or has always existed. But it isfurther true that a great many adults, who are on affectionate terms withtheir brothers and sisters and are ready to stand by them today, passedtheir childhood on almost unbroken terms of enmity with them. Theelder child ill-treats the younger, maligns him and robs him of his toys;while the younger is consumed with impotent rage against the elder, en-vies and fears him, or meets his oppressor with the ﬁrst stirrings of a loveof liberty and a sense of justice. Their parents complain that the childrendo not get on with one another, but cannot discover why. It is easy to seethat the character of even a good child is not what we should wish to ﬁndit in an adult. Children are completely egoistic; they feel their needs in-tensely and strive ruthlessly to satisfy them—especially as against the ri-vals, other children, and ﬁrst and foremost as against their brothers andsisters. But we do not on that account call a child ‘bad,’ we call him‘naughty’; he is no more answerable for his evil deeds in our judgementthan in the eyes of the law. And it is right that this should be so; for wemay expect that, before the end of the period which we count as child-hood, altruistic impulses and morality will awaken in the little egoist and(to use Meynert’s terms [e.g. 1892, 169 ff.]) a secondary ego will overlayand inhibit the primary one. It is true, no doubt, that morality does notset in simultaneously all along the line and that the length of non-moralchildhood varies in different individuals. If this morality fails to develop,268 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1909:] Cf. my ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’
(1909b) and my paper ‘On the Sexual Theories of Children’ (1908 c).9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 268we like to talk of ‘degeneracy,’ though what in fact faces us is an inhibi-
tion in development. After the primary character has already been over-laid by later development, it can still be laid bare again, at all events inpart, in cases of hysterical illness. There is a really striking resemblancebetween what is known as the hysterical character and that of a naughtychild. Obsessional neurosis, on the contrary, corresponds to a super-morality imposed as a reinforcing weight upon fresh stirrings of the pri-mary character.
Many people, therefore, who love their brothers and sisters and would
feel bereaved if they were to die, harbour evil wishes against them in theirunconscious, dating from earlier times; and these are capable of being realized in dreams.
It is of quite particular interest, however, to observe the behaviour of
small children up to the age of two or three or a little older towards theiryounger brothers and sisters. Here, for instance, was a child who had sofar been the only one; and now he was told that the stork had brought anew baby. He looked the new arrival up and down and then declared de-cisively: ‘The stork can take him away again!’
1I am quite seriously of the
opinion that a child can form a just estimate of the set-back he has to ex-pect at the hands of the little stranger. A lady of my acquaintance, who ison very good terms today with a sister four years her junior, tells me thatshe greeted the news of her ﬁrst arrival with this qualiﬁcation: ‘But all thesame I shan’t give her my red cap!’ Even if a child only comes to realizethe situation later on, his hostility will date from that moment. I know ofa case in which a little girl of less than three tried to strangle an infant inits cradle because she felt that its continued presence boded her no good.Children at that time of life are capable of jealousy of any degree of in-tensity and obviousness. Again, if it should happen that the baby sisterdoes in fact disappear after a short while, the elder child will ﬁnd thewhole affection of the household once more concentrated upon himself.269 D. Typical Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1909:] The three-and-a-half-year-old Hans (whose phobia was
the subject of the analysis mentioned in the preceding footnote) exclaimed
shortly after the birth of a sister, while he was suffering from a feverish sorethroat: ‘I don’t want a baby sister!’ [Freud, 1909b, Section I.] During his neuro-
sis eighteen months later he frankly confessed to a wish that his mother mightdrop the baby into the bath so that she would die. [Ibid., Section H (April 11).]At the same time, Hans was a good-natured and affectionate child, who soongrew fond of this same sister and particularly enjoyed taking her under his wing.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 269If after that the stork should bring yet another baby, it seems only logical
that the little favourite should nourish a wish that his new competitormay meet with the same fate as the earlier one, so that he himself may beas happy as he was originally and during the interval.
1Normally, of
course, this attitude of a child towards a younger brother or sister is asimple function of the difference between their ages. Where the gap intime is sufﬁciently long, an elder girl will already begin to feel the stirringof her maternal instincts towards the helpless new-born baby.
Hostile feelings towards brothers and sisters must be far more frequent
in childhood than the unseeing eye of the adult observer can perceive.
2
In the case of my own children, who followed each other in rapid suc-
cession, I neglected the opportunity of carrying out observations of thiskind; but I am now making up for this neglect by observing a smallnephew, whose autocratic rule was upset, after lasting for ﬁfteen months,by the appearance of a female rival. I am told, it is true, that the youngman behaves in the most chivalrous manner to his little sister, that hekisses her hand and strokes her; but I have been able to convince myselfthat even before the end of his second year he made use of his powers ofspeech for the purpose of criticizing someone whom he could not fail toregard as superﬂuous. Whenever the conversation touched upon her heused to intervene in it and exclaim petulantly: ‘Too ’ickle! too ’ickle!’During the last few months the baby’s growth has made enough progressto place her beyond this particular ground for contempt, and the littleboy has found a different basis for his assertion that she does not deserve270 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Deaths that are experienced in this way in childhood
may quickly be forgotten in the family; but psychoanalytic research shows that
they have a very important inﬂuence on subsequent neuroses.
2 [Footnote added 1914:] Since this was written, a large number of observations
have been made and recorded in the literature of psycho-analysis upon the origi-nally hostile attitude of children towards their brothers and sisters and one oftheir parents. The [Swiss] author and poet Spitteler has given us a particularlygenuine and naïve account of this childish attitude, derived from his own child-hood [1914, 40]: ‘Moreover there was a second Adolf there: a little creature whothey alleged was my brother, though I could not see what use he was and still lesswhy they made as much fuss of him as of me myself. I was sufﬁcient so far as Iwas concerned; why should I want a brother? And he was not merely useless, hewas positively in the way. When I pestered my grandmother, he wanted to pesterher too. When I was taken out in the perambulator, he sat opposite to me andtook up half the space, so that we were bound to kick each other with our feet.’9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 270so much attention: at every suitable opportunity he draws attention to
the fact that she has no teeth.1We all of us recollect how the eldest girl of
another of my sisters, who was then a child of six, spent half-an-hour ininsisting upon each of her aunts in succession agreeing with her: ‘Luciecan’t understand that yet, can she?’ she kept asking. Lucie was her rival—two and a half years her junior.
In none of my women patients, to take an example, have I failed to
come upon this dream of the death of a brother or sister, which tallieswith an increase in hostility. I have only found a single exception; and itwas easy to interpret this as a conﬁrmation of the rule. On one occasionduring an analytic session I was explaining this subject to a lady, sincein view of her symptom its discussion seemed to me relevant. To my as-tonishment she replied that she had never had such a dream. Anotherdream, however, occurred to her, which ostensibly had no connectionwith the topic—a dream which she had ﬁrst dreamt when she was fouryears old and at that time the youngest of the family, and which she haddreamt repeatedly since: A whole crowd of children—all her brothers, sisters
and cousins of both sexes—were romping in a ﬁeld. Suddenly they all grewwings, ﬂew away and disappeared. She had no idea what this dream meant;
but it is not hard to recognize that in its original form it had been a dreamof the death of all her brothers and sisters, and had been only slightly in-ﬂuenced by the censorship. I may venture to suggest the following analy-sis. On the occasion of the death of one of this crowd of children (in thisinstance the children of two brothers had been brought up together as asingle family) the dreamer, not yet four years old at the time, must haveasked some wise grown-up person what became of children when theywere dead. The reply must have been: ‘They grow wings and turn intolittle angels.’ In the dream which followed upon this piece of informationall the dreamer’s brothers and sisters had wings like angels and—which isthe main point—ﬂew away. Our little baby-killer was left alone, strangeto say: the only survivor of the whole crowd! We can hardly be wrong insupposing that the fact of the children romping in a ﬁeld before ﬂying
away points to butterﬂies. It is as though the child was led by the samechain of thought as the peoples of antiquity to picture the soul as havinga butterﬂy’s wings.271 D. Typical Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1909:] Little Hans, when he was three and a half, gave vent to a
crushing criticism of his sister in the same words. It was because of her lack of
teeth, he supposed, that she was unable to talk. [Freud, 1909b, Section I.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 271At this point someone will perhaps interrupt: ‘Granted that children
have hostile impulses towards their brothers and sisters, how can a child’s
mind reach such a pitch of depravity as to wish for the death of his rivals
or of playmates stronger than himself, as though the death penalty werethe only punishment for every crime?’ Anyone who talks like this hasfailed to bear in mind that a child’s idea of being ‘dead’ has nothingmuch in common with ours apart from the word. Children know noth-ing of the horrors of corruption, of freezing in the ice-cold grave, of theterrors of eternal nothingness—ideas which grown-up people ﬁnd it sohard to tolerate, as is proved by all the myths of a future life. The fear ofdeath has no meaning to a child; hence it is that he will play with thedreadful word and use it as a threat against a playmate: ‘If you do thatagain, you’ll die, like Franz!’ Meanwhile the poor mother gives a shudderand remembers, perhaps, that the greater half of the human race fail tosurvive their childhood years. It was actually possible for a child, who wasover eight years old at the time, coming home from a visit to the NaturalHistory Museum, to say to his mother: ‘I’m so fond of you, Mummy:when you die I’ll have you stuffed and I’ll keep you in this room, so that
I can see you allthe time.’ So little resemblance is there between a child’s
idea of being dead and our own!
1
To children, who, moreover, are spared the sight of the scenes of suf-
fering which precede death, being ‘dead’ means approximately the sameas being ‘gone’—not troubling the survivors any longer. A child makes nodistinction as to how this absence is brought about: whether it is due toa journey, to a dismissal, to an estrangement, or to death.
2If, during a
child’s prehistoric epoch, his nurse has been dismissed, and if soon after-272 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1909:] I was astonished to hear a highly intelligent boy of ten
remark after the sudden death of his father: ‘I know father’s dead, but what I
can’t understand is why he doesn’t come home to supper.’—[ Added 1919:] Fur-
ther material on this subject will be found in the ﬁrst [seven] volumes of the pe-riodical Imago [1912–21], under the standing rubric of ‘ Vom wahren Wesen der
Kinderseele’ [‘The T rue Nature of the Child Mind’], edited by Frau Dr. H. vonHug-Hellmuth.
2 [Footnote added 1919:] An observation made by a parent who had a knowledge
of psycho-analysis caught the actual moment at which his highly intelligentfour-year-old daughter perceived the distinction between being ‘gone’ and being‘dead.’ The little girl had been troublesome at meal-time and noticed that oneof the maids at the pension where they were staying was looking at her askance.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 272wards his mother has died, the two events are superimposed on each
other in a single series in his memory as revealed in analysis. When peopleare absent, children do not miss them with any great intensity; manymothers have learnt this to their sorrow when, after being away fromhome for some weeks on a summer holiday, they are met on their returnby the news that the children have not once asked after their mummy. Iftheir mother does actually make the journey to that ‘undiscover’d coun-try, from whose bourn no traveller returns,’ children seem at ﬁrst to haveforgotten her, and it is only later on that they begin to call their deadmother to mind.
Thus if a child has reasons for wishing the absence of another, there is
nothing to restrain him from giving his wish the form of the other childbeing dead. And the psychical reaction to dreams containing death-wishes proves that, in spite of the different content of these wishes in thecase of children, they are nevertheless in some way or other the same aswishes expressed in the same terms by adults.
1
If, then, a child’s death-wishes against his brothers and sisters are ex-
plained by the childish egoism which makes him regard them as his rivals,how are we to explain his death-wishes against his parents, who surroundhim with love and fulﬁl his needs and whose preservation that same ego-ism should lead him to desire?
A solution of this difﬁculty is afforded by the observation that dreams
of the death of parents apply with preponderant frequency to the parentwho is of the same sex as the dreamer: that men, that is, dream mostly oftheir father’s death and women of their mother’s. I cannot pretend thatthis is universally so, but the preponderance in the direction I have indi-cated is so evident that it requires to be explained by a factor of general273 D. Typical Dreams
‘I wish Joseﬁne was dead,’ was the child’s comment to her father. ‘Why dead?’
enquired her father soothingly; ‘wouldn’t it do if she went away?’ ‘No,’ repliedthe child; ‘then she’d come back again.’ The unbounded self-love (the narcis-sism) of children regards any interference as an act of lèse majesté; and their feel-
ings demand (like the Draconian code) that any such crime shall receive the oneform of punishment which admits of no degrees.
1 [The adult attitude to death is discussed by Freud more particularly in the second
essay of his Totem and T aboo (1912–13), Section 3( c), in his paper on ‘The Three
Caskets’ (1913f ) and in the second part of his ‘Thoughts on War and Death’
(1915b ).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 273importance.1It is as though—to put it bluntly—a sexual preference were
making itself felt at an early age: as though boys regarded their fathers and
girls their mothers as their rivals in love, whose elimination could not failto be to their advantage.
Before this idea is rejected as a monstrous one, it is as well in this case,
too, to consider the real relations obtaining—this time between parentsand children. We must distinguish between what the cultural standardsof ﬁlial piety demand of this relation and what everyday observationshows it in fact to be. More than one occasion for hostility lies concealedin the relation between parents and children—a relation which affordsthe most ample opportunities for wishes to arise which cannot pass thecensorship.
Let us consider ﬁrst the relation between father and son. The sanctity
which we attribute to the rules laid down in the Decalogue has, I think,blunted our powers of perceiving the real facts. We seem scarcely to ven-ture to observe that the majority of mankind disobey the Fifth Command-ment. Alike in the lowest and in the highest strata of human society ﬁlialpiety is wont to give way to other interests. The obscure informationwhich is brought to us by mythology and legend from the primaeval agesof human society gives an unpleasing picture of the father’s despotic powerand of the ruthlessness with which he made use of it. Kronos devoured hischildren, just as the wild boar devours the sow’s litter; while Zeus emascu-lated his father
2and made himself ruler in his place. The more unre-
stricted was the rule of the father in the ancient family, the more must theson, as his destined successor, have found himself in the position of an en-emy, and the more impatient must he have been to become ruler himselfthrough his father’s death. Even in our middle-class families fathers are asa rule inclined to refuse their sons independence and the means necessary274 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1925:] The situation is often obscured by the emergence of a
self-punitive impulse, which threatens the dreamer, by way of a moral reaction,
with the loss of the parent whom he loves.
2 [Footnote added 1909:] Or so he is reported to have done according to some
myths. According to others, emasculation was only carried out by Kronos on hisfather Uranus. [This passage is discussed in Chapter X (3) of The Psychopathology
of Everyday Life (Freud, 1901 b).] For the mythological signiﬁcance of this theme,
cf. Rank, 1909, [ added 1914:] and Rank, 1912 c, Chapter IX, Section 2.—
[These sentences in the text are, of course, an early hint at the line of thoughtdeveloped later by Freud in his Totem and T aboo (1912–13).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 274to secure it and thus to foster the growth of the germ of hostility which is
inherent in their relation. A physician will often be in a position to noticehow a son’s grief at the loss of his father cannot suppress his satisfaction athaving at length won his freedom. In our society today fathers are apt tocling desperately to what is left of a now sadly antiquated potestas patris fa-
milias ; and an author who, like Ibsen, brings the immemorial struggle be-
tween fathers and sons into prominence in his writings may be certain ofproducing his effect.
Occasions for conﬂict between a daughter and her mother arise when
the daughter begins to grow up and long for sexual liberty, but ﬁnds her-self under her mother’s tutelage; while the mother, on the other hand, iswarned by her daughter’s growth that the time has come when she herselfmust abandon her claims to sexual satisfaction.
All of this is patent to the eyes of everyone. But it does not help us in
our endeavour to explain dreams of a parent’s death in people whosepiety towards their parents has long been unimpeachably established. Pre-vious discussions, moreover, will have prepared us to learn that the death-wish against parents dates back to earliest childhood.
This supposition is conﬁrmed with a certainty beyond all doubt in the
case of psychoneurotics when they are subjected to analysis. We learn fromthem that a child’s sexual wishes—if in their embryonic stage they deserveto be so described—awaken very early, and that a girl’s ﬁrst affection is forher father
1and a boy’s ﬁrst childish desires are for his mother. Accordingly,
the father becomes a disturbing rival to the boy and the mother to the girl;and I have already shown in the case of brothers and sisters how easily suchfeelings can lead to a death-wish. The parents too give evidence as a rule ofsexual partiality: a natural predilection usually sees to it that a man tendsto spoil his little daughters, while his wife takes her sons’ part; though bothof them, where their judgement is not disturbed by the magic of sex, keepa strict eye upon their children’s education. The child is very well aware ofthis partiality and turns against that one of his parents who is opposed toshowing it. Being loved by an adult does not merely bring a child the sat-isfaction of a special need; it also means that he will get what he wants inevery other respect as well. Thus he will be following his own sexual in-stinct and at the same time giving fresh strength to the inclination shownby his parents if his choice between them falls in with theirs.275 D. Typical Dreams
1 [Freud’s views on this point were later modiﬁed. Cf. Freud, 1925j and 1931b.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 275The signs of these infantile preferences are for the most part over-
looked; yet some of them are to be observed even after the ﬁrst years of
childhood. An eight-year-old girl of my acquaintance, if her mother iscalled away from the table, makes use of the occasion to proclaim herselfher successor: ‘I ’m going to be Mummy now. Do you want some more
greens, Karl? Well, help yourself, then!’ and so on. A particularly giftedand lively girl of four, in whom this piece of child psychology is especiallytransparent, declared quite openly: ‘Mummy can go away now. ThenDaddy must marry me and I’ll be his wife.’ Such a wish occurring in achild is not in the least inconsistent with her being tenderly attached toher mother. If a little boy is allowed to sleep beside his mother when hisfather is away from home, but has to go back to the nursery and to some-one of whom he is far less fond as soon as his father returns, he may easilybegin to form a wish that his father should always be away, so that he
himself could keep his place beside his dear, lovely Mummy. One obviousway of attaining this wish would be if his father were dead; for the childhas learnt one thing by experience—namely that ‘dead’ people, such asGranddaddy, are always away and never come back.
Though observations of this kind on small children ﬁt in perfectly
with the interpretation I have proposed, they do not carry such completeconviction as is forced upon the physician by psycho-analyses of adultneurotics. In the latter case dreams of the sort we are considering are in-troduced into the analysis in such a context that it is impossible to avoidinterpreting them as wishful dreams.
One day one of my women patients was in a distressed and tearful
mood. ‘I don’t want ever to see my relations again,’ she said, ‘they mustthink me horrible.’ She then went on, with almost no transition, to saythat she remembered a dream, though of course she had no idea what itmeant. When she was four years old she had a dream that a lynx or fox
1
was walking on the roof; then something had fallen down or she had fallendown; and then her mother was carried out of the house dead —and she wept
bitterly. I told her that this dream must mean that when she was a childshe had wished she could see her mother dead, and that it must be on ac-count of the dream that she felt her relations must think her horrible. Ihad scarcely said this when she produced some material which threw light276 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [The German names for these animals are very much alike: ‘ Luchs ’ and ‘Fuchs. ’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 276on the dream. ‘Lynx-eye’ was a term of abuse that had been thrown at her
by a street-urchin when she was a very small child. When she was threeyears old, a tile off the roof had fallen on her mother’s head and made itbleed violently.
I once had an opportunity of making a detailed study of a young
woman who passed through a variety of psychical conditions. Her illnessbegan with a state of confusional excitement during which she displayeda quite special aversion to her mother, hitting and abusing her whenevershe came near her bed, while at the same period she was docile and affec-tionate towards a sister who was many years her senior. This was followedby a state in which she was lucid but somewhat apathetic and sufferedfrom badly disturbed sleep. It was during this phase that I began treatingher and analysing her dreams. An immense number of these dreams wereconcerned, with a greater or less degree of disguise, with the death of hermother: at one time she would be attending an old woman’s funeral, atanother she and her sister would be sitting at table dressed in mourning.There could be no question as to the meaning of these dreams. As hercondition improved still further, hysterical phobias developed. The mosttormenting of these was a fear that something might have happened toher mother. She was obliged to hurry home, wherever she might be, toconvince herself that her mother was still alive. This case, taken in con-junction with what I had learnt from other sources, was highly instruc-tive: it exhibited, translated as it were into different languages, the variousways in which the psychical apparatus reacted to one and the same excit-ing idea. In the confusional state, in which, as I believe, the second psy-chical agency was overwhelmed by the normally suppressed ﬁrst one, herunconscious hostility to her mother found a powerful motor expression.
When the calmer condition set in, when the rebellion was suppressed andthe domination of the censorship re-established, the only region left openin which her hostility could realize the wish for her mother’s death wasthat of dreaming. When a normal state was still more ﬁrmly established,it led to the production of her exaggerated worry about her mother as ahysterical counter-reaction and defensive phenomenon. In view of this itis no longer hard to understand why hysterical girls are so often attachedto their mothers with such exaggerated affection.
On another occasion I had an opportunity of obtaining a deep insight
into the unconscious mind of a young man whose life was made almostimpossible by an obsessional neurosis. He was unable to go out into thestreet because he was tortured by the fear that he would kill everyone he277 D. Typical Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 277met. He spent his days in preparing his alibi in case he might be charged
with one of the murders committed in the town. It is unnecessary to addthat he was a man of equally high morals and education. The analysis(which, incidentally, led to his recovery) showed that the basis of this dis-tressing obsession was an impulse to murder his somewhat over-severe father. This impulse, to his astonishment, had been consciously expressedwhen he was seven years old, but it had, of course, originated much ear-lier in his childhood. After his father’s painful illness and death, the pa-tient’s obsessional self-reproaches appeared—he was in his thirty-ﬁrst yearat the time—taking the shape of a phobia transferred on to strangers. Aperson, he felt, who was capable of wanting to push his own father over aprecipice from the top of a mountain was not to be trusted to respect thelives of those less closely related to him; he was quite right to shut himselfup in his room.
1
In my experience, which is already extensive, the chief part in the
mental lives of all children who later become psychoneurotics is playedby their parents. Being in love with the one parent and hating the otherare among the essential constituents of the stock of psychical impulseswhich is formed at that time and which is of such importance in deter-mining the symptoms of the later neurosis. It is not my belief, however,that psychoneurotics differ sharply in this respect from other human be-ings who remain normal—that they are able, that is, to create somethingabsolutely new and peculiar to themselves. It is far more probable—andthis is conﬁrmed by occasional observations on normal children—thatthey are only distinguished by exhibiting on a magniﬁed scale feelings oflove and hatred to their parents which occur less obviously and less in-tensely in the minds of most children.
This discovery is conﬁrmed by a legend that has come down to us
from classical antiquity: a legend whose profound and universal power tomove can only be understood if the hypothesis I have put forward in re-gard to the psychology of children has an equally universal validity. WhatI have in mind is the legend of King Oedipus and Sophocles’ dramawhich bears his name.
Oedipus, son of Laïus, King of Thebes, and of Jocasta, was exposed as
an infant because an oracle had warned Laïus that the still unborn child278 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [This patient is referred to again on p. 465.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 278would be his father’s murderer. The child was rescued, and grew up as a
prince in an alien court, until, in doubts as to his origin, he too questionedthe oracle and was warned to avoid his home since he was destined to mur-der his father and take his mother in marriage. On the road leading awayfrom what he believed was his home, he met King Laïus and slew him in asudden quarrel. He came next to Thebes and solved the riddle set him bythe Sphinx who barred his way. Out of gratitude the Thebans made himtheir king and gave him Jocasta’s hand in marriage. He reigned long inpeace and honour, and she who, unknown to him, was his mother bore himtwo sons and two daughters. Then at last a plague broke out and the The-bans made enquiry once more of the oracle. It is at this point that Sopho-cles’ tragedy opens. The messengers bring back the reply that the plague willcease when the murderer of Laïus has been driven from the land.
But he, where is he? Where shall now be readThe fading record of this ancient guilt?
1
The action of the play consists in nothing other than the process of re-vealing, with cunning delays and ever-mounting excitement—a processthat can be likened to the work of a psycho-analysis—that Oedipus him-self is the murderer of Laïus, but further that he is the son of the mur-dered man and of Jocasta. Appalled at the abomination which he hasunwittingly perpetrated, Oedipus blinds himself and forsakes his home.The oracle has been fulﬁlled.
Oedipus Rex is what is known as a tragedy of destiny. Its tragic effect is
said to lie in the contrast between the supreme will of the gods and thevain attempts of mankind to escape the evil that threatens them. The les-son which, it is said, the deeply moved spectator should learn from thetragedy is submission to the divine will and realization of his own impo-tence. Modern dramatists have accordingly tried to achieve a similar tragiceffect by weaving the same contrast into a plot invented by themselves.But the spectators have looked on unmoved while a curse or an oracle wasfulﬁlled in spite of all the efforts of some innocent man: later tragedies ofdestiny have failed in their effect.
If Oedipus Rex moves a modern audience no less than it did the contem-
porary Greek one, the explanation can only be that its effect does not lie in279 D. Typical Dreams
1 [Lewis Campbell’s translation (1883), lines 108 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 279the contrast between destiny and human will, but is to be looked for in the
particular nature of the material on which that contrast is exempliﬁed.There must be something which makes a voice within us ready to recog-nize the compelling force of destiny in the Oedipus, while we can dismissas merely arbitrary such dispositions as are laid down in [Grillparzer’s] Die
Ahnfrau or other modern tragedies of destiny. And a factor of this kind is
in fact involved in the story of King Oedipus. His destiny moves us onlybecause it might have been ours—because the oracle laid the same curseupon us before our birth as upon him. It is the fate of all of us, perhaps, todirect our ﬁrst sexual impulse towards our mother and our ﬁrst hatred andour ﬁrst murderous wish against our father. Our dreams convince us thatthat is so. King Oedipus, who slew his father Laïus and married his motherJocasta, merely shows us the fulﬁlment of our own childhood wishes. But,more fortunate than he, we have meanwhile succeeded, in so far as we havenot become psychoneurotics, in detaching our sexual impulses from ourmothers and in forgetting our jealousy of our fathers. Here is one in whomthese primaeval wishes of our childhood have been fulﬁlled, and we shrinkback from him with the whole force of the repression by which thosewishes have since that time been held down within us. While the poet, ashe unravels the past, brings to light the guilt of Oedipus, he is at the sametime compelling us to recognize our own inner minds, in which those sameimpulses, though suppressed, are still to be found. The contrast with whichthe closing Chorus leaves us confronted—
. . . Fix on Oedipus your eyes,
Who resolved the dark enigma, noblest champion and most wise.Like a star his envied fortune mounted beaming far and wide:Now he sinks in seas of anguish, whelmed beneath a raging tide . . .
1
—strikes as a warning at ourselves and our pride, at us who since ourchildhood have grown so wise and so mighty in our own eyes. Like Oedi-pus, we live in ignorance of these wishes, repugnant to morality, whichhave been forced upon us by Nature, and after their revelation we may allof us well seek to close our eyes to the scenes of our childhood.
2280 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Lewis Campbell’s translation, lines 1524 ff.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] None of the ﬁndings of psycho-analytic research has pro voked
such embittered denials, such ﬁerce opposition—or such amusing contortions—on9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 280There is an unmistakable indication in the text of Sophocles’ tragedy it-
self that the legend of Oedipus sprang from some primaeval dream- material
which had as its content the distressing disturbance of a child’s relation tohis parents owing to the ﬁrst stirrings of sexuality. At a point when Oedi-pus, though he is not yet enlightened, has begun to feel troubled by his rec-ollection of the oracle, Jocasta consoles him by referring to a dream whichmany people dream, though, as she thinks, it has no meaning:
Many a man ere now in dreams hath lainWith her who bare him. He hath least annoyWho with such omens troubleth not his mind.
1
Today, just as then, many men dream of having sexual relations with theirmothers, and speak of the fact with indignation and astonishment. It isclearly the key to the tragedy and the complement to the dream of thedreamer’s father being dead. The story of Oedipus is the reaction of theimagination to these two typical dreams. And just as these dreams, whendreamt by adults, are accompanied by feelings of repulsion, so too the leg-end must include horror and self-punishment. Its further modiﬁcationoriginates once again in a misconceived secondary revision of the material,which has sought to exploit it for theological purposes. (Cf. the dream- material in dreams of exhibiting, pp. 261 ff.) The attempt to harmonize281 D. Typical Dreams
the part of critics as this indication of the childhood impulses towards incest which
persist in the unconscious. An attempt has even been made recently to make out,in the face of all experience, that the incest should only be taken as  ‘symbolic.’—Ferenczi (1912) has proposed an ingenious ‘over-interpretation’ of the Oedipusmyth, based on a passage in one of Schopenhauer’s letters.—[ Added 1919:] Later
studies have shown that the ‘Oedipus complex,’ which was touched upon for theﬁrst time in the above paragraphs in the Interpretation of Dreams , throws a light of
undreamt-of importance on the history of the human race and the evolution of re-ligion and morality. (See my Totem and T aboo , 1912–13 [Essay IV].)—[Actually the
gist of this discussion of the Oedipus complex and of the Oedipus Rex, as well as of
what follows on the subject of Hamlet, had already been put forward by Freud in a
letter to Fliess as early as October 15th, 1897. (See Freud, 1950 a, Letter 71.) A still
earlier hint at the discovery of the Oedipus complex was included in a letter of May31st, 1897. (Ibid., Draft N.)—The actual term ‘Oedipus complex’ seems to havebeen ﬁrst used by Freud in his published writings in the ﬁrst of his ‘Contributionsto the Psychology of Love’ (1910 h).]
1 [Lewis Campbell’s translation, lines 982 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 2811 [This paragraph was printed as a footnote in the ﬁrst edition (1900) and in-
cluded in the text from 1914 onward.]divine omnipotence with human responsibility must naturally fail in con-
nection with this subject-matter just as with any other.
Another of the great creations of tragic poetry, Shakespeare’s Hamlet, has
its roots in the same soil as Oedipus Rex.1But the changed treatment of the
same material reveals the whole difference in the mental life of these twowidely separated epochs of civilization: the secular advance of repression inthe emotional life of mankind. In the Oedipus the child’s wishful phantasy
that underlies it is brought into the open and realized as it would be ina dream. In Hamlet it remains repressed; and—just as in the case of a
 neurosis—we only learn of its existence from its inhibiting consequences.Strangely enough, the overwhelming effect produced by the more moderntragedy has turned out to be compatible with the fact that people have re-mained completely in the dark as to the hero’s character. The play is builtup on Hamlet’s hesitations over fulﬁlling the task of revenge that is assignedto him; but its text offers no reasons or motives for these hesitations and animmense variety of attempts at interpreting them have failed to produce aresult. According to the view which was originated by Goethe and is still theprevailing one today, Hamlet represents the type of man whose power of di-rect action is paralysed by an excessive development of his intellect. (He is‘sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought.’) According to another view, thedramatist has tried to portray a pathologically irresolute character whichmight be classed as neurasthenic. The plot of the drama shows us, however,that Hamlet is far from being represented as a person incapable of takingany action. We see him doing so on two occasions: ﬁrst in a sudden outburstof temper, when he runs his sword through the eavesdropper behind the arras, and secondly in a premeditated and even crafty fashion, when, withall the callousness of a Renaissance prince, he sends the two courtiers to thedeath that had been planned for himself. What is it, then, that inhibits himin fulﬁlling the task set him by his father’s ghost? The answer, once again, isthat it is the peculiar nature of the task. Hamlet is able to do anything— except take vengeance on the man who did away with his father and tookthat father’s place with his mother, the man who shows him the repressedwishes of his own childhood realized. Thus the loathing which should drivehim on to revenge is replaced in him by self-reproaches, by scruples of con-282 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 282science, which remind him that he himself is literally no better than the sin-
ner whom he is to punish. Here I have translated into conscious terms whatwas bound to remain unconscious in Hamlet’s mind; and if anyone is in-clined to call him a hysteric, I can only accept the fact as one that is impliedby my interpretation. The distaste for sexuality expressed by Hamlet in hisconversation with Ophelia ﬁts in very well with this: the same distastewhich was destined to take possession of the poet’s mind more and moreduring the years that followed, and which reached its extreme expression inTimon of Athens. For it can of course only be the poet’s own mind which
confronts us in Hamlet. I observe in a book on Shakespeare by Georg Bran-des (1896) a statement that Hamlet was written immediately after the death
of Shakespeare’s father (in 1601), that is, under the immediate impact of hisbereavement and, as we may well assume, while his childhood feelings abouthis father had been freshly revived. It is known, too, that Shakespeare’s ownson who died at an early age bore the name of ‘Hamnet,’ which is identicalwith ‘Hamlet.’ Just as Hamlet deals with the relation of a son to his parents,
so Macbeth (written at approximately the same period) is concerned with
the subject of childlessness. But just as all neurotic symptoms, and, for thatmatter, dreams, are capable of being ‘over-interpreted’ and indeed need tobe, if they are to be fully understood, so all genuinely creative writings arethe product of more than a single motive and more than a single impulse inthe poet’s mind, and are open to more than a single interpretation. In whatI have written I have only attempted to interpret the deepest layer of im-pulses in the mind of the creative writer.
1283 D. Typical Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1919:] The above indications of a psycho-analytic explanation of
Hamlet have since been ampliﬁed by Ernest Jones and defended against the alter-
native views put forward in the literature of the subject. (See Jones, 1910 a[and,
in a completer form, 1949].)—[Added 1930:] Incidentally, I have in the mean-
time ceased to believe that the author of Shakespeare’s works was the man from
Stratford. [See Freud, 1930 e]—[Added 1919:] Further attempts at an analysis of
Macbeth will be found in a paper of mine [Freud, 1916 d] and in one by Jekels
(1917).—[The ﬁrst part of this footnote was included in a different form in theedition of 1911 but omitted from 1914 onwards: ‘The views on the problem ofHamlet contained in the above passage have since been conﬁrmed and supported
with fresh arguments in an extensive study by Dr. Ernest Jones of Toronto(1910 a). He has also pointed out the relation between the material in Hamlet and
the myths of the birth of heroes discussed by Rank (1909).’—Freud further dis-cussed Hamlet in a posthumously published sketch dealing with ‘Psychopathic
Characters on the Stage’ (1942 b), probably written in 1905 or 1906.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 283I cannot leave the subject of typical dreams of the death of loved rela-
tives, without adding a few more words to throw light on their signiﬁ-
cance for the theory of dreams in general. In these dreams we ﬁnd thehighly unusual condition realized of a dream-thought formed by a re-pressed wish entirely eluding censorship and passing into the dream with-out modiﬁcation. There must be special factors at work to make thisevent possible, and I believe that the occurrence of these dreams is facili-tated by two such factors. Firstly, there is no wish that seems more remotefrom us than this one: ‘we couldn’t even dream ’—so we believe—of wish-
ing such a thing. For this reason the dream-censorship is not armed tomeet such a monstrosity, just as Solon’s penal code contained no punish-ment for parricide. Secondly, in this case the repressed and unsuspectedwish is particularly often met half-way by a residue from the previous dayin the form of a worry about the safety of the person concerned. This
worry can only make its way into the dream by availing itself of the cor-responding wish; while the wish can disguise itself behind the worry thathas become active during the day. [Cf. pp. 594 f.] We may feel inclinedto think that things are simpler than this and that one merely carries onduring the night and in dreams with what one has been turning over inone’s mind during the day; but if so we shall be leaving dreams of thedeath of people of whom the dreamer is fond completely in the air andwithout any connection with our explanation of dreams in general, andwe shall thus be clinging quite unnecessarily to a riddle which is perfectlycapable of solution.
It is also instructive to consider the relation of these dreams to  anxiety-
dreams. In the dreams we have been discussing, a repressed wish has founda means of evading censorship—and the distortion which censorship in-volves. The invariable concomitant is that painful feelings are experiencedin the dream. In just the same way anxiety-dreams only occur if the cen-sorship has been wholly or partly overpowered; and, on the other hand,the overpowering of the censorship is facilitated if anxiety has already beenproduced as an immediate sensation arising from somatic sources. [Cf.above, pp. 255 ff.] We can thus plainly see the purpose for which the cen-sorship exercises its ofﬁce and brings about the distortion of dreams: itdoes so in order to prevent the generation of anxiety or other forms of distress-
ing affect.
I have spoken above [p. 268] of the egoism of children’s minds, and I
may now add, with a hint at a possible connection between the two facts,284 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 284that dreams have the same characteristic. All of them are completely ego-
istic:1the beloved ego appears in all of them, even though it may be
 disguised. The wishes that are fulﬁlled in them are invariably the ego’swishes, and if a dream seems to have been provoked by an altruistic in-terest, we are only being deceived by appearances. Here are a few analysesof instances which seem to contradict this assertion.
i
A child of under four years old reported having dreamt that he had
seen a big dish with a big joint of roast meat and vegetables on it. All at oncethe joint had been eaten up—whole and without being cut up. He had notseen the person who ate it .
2
Who can the unknown person have been whose sumptuous banquet
of meat was the subject of the little boy’s dream? His experiences duringthe dream-day must enlighten us on the subject. By doctor’s orders hehad been put on a milk diet for the past few days. On the evening of thedream-day he had been naughty, and as a punishment he had been sentto bed without his supper. He had been through this hunger-cure oncebefore and had been very brave about it. He knew he would get nothing,but would not allow himself to show by so much as a single word that hewas hungry. Education had already begun to have an effect on him: itfound expression in this dream, which exhibits the beginning of dream-distortion. There can be no doubt that the person whose wishes were285 D. Typical Dreams
1 [Cf. end of footnote below, pp. 288. See also pp. 338 f.]
2 [This dream, which was dreamt by Fliess’s son Robert, is mentioned in Freud’s let-
ters to Fliess of August 8 and 20, 1899. (Freud, 1950a , Letters 114 and 116.)]—
The appearance in dreams of things of great size and in great quantities and
amounts, and of exaggeration generally, may be another childish characteristic.Children have no more ardent wish than to be big and grown-up and to get asmuch of things as grown-up people do. They are hard to satisfy, know no suchword as ‘enough’ and insist insatiably on a repetition of things which they have en-joyed or whose taste they liked. It is only the civilizing inﬂuence of education thatteaches them moderation and how to be content or resigned. Everyone knows thatneurotics are equally inclined to be extravagant and immoderate. [Children’s loveof repetition was alluded to by Freud towards the end of the sixth section of Chap-ter VII of his book on jokes (Freud, 1905c ) and again discussed near the beginning
of Chapter V of Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g ).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 285aimed at this lavish meal—a meat meal, too—was himself. But since he
knew he was not allowed it, he did not venture to sit down to the mealhimself, as hungry children do in dreams. (Cf. my little daughter Anna’sdream of strawberries on p. 163.) The person who ate the meal remainedanonymous.
ii
I dreamt one night that I saw in the window of a bookshop a new vol-
ume in one of the series of monographs for connoisseurs which I am inthe habit of buying—monographs on great artists, on world history, onfamous cities, etc. The new series was called ‘Famous Speakers’ or ‘Speeches’
and its ﬁrst volume bore the name of Dr. Lecher.
When I came to analyse this, it seemed to me improbable that I
should be concerned in my dreams with the fame of Dr. Lecher, the non-stop speaker of the German Nationalist obstructionists in Parliament.The position was that a few days earlier I had taken on some new patientsfor psychological treatment, and was now obliged to talk for ten or elevenhours every day. So it was I myself who was a non-stop speaker.
iii
Another time I had a dream that a man I knew on the staff of the Uni-
versity said to me: ‘ My son, the Myops.’ Then followed a dialogue made
up of short remarks and rejoinders. After this, however, there was yet athird piece of dream in which I myself and my sons ﬁgured. So far as thedream’s latent content was concerned, Professor M. and his son were menof straw—a mere screen for me and my eldest son. I shall have to returnto this dream later, on account of another of its features. [See pp. 449 ff.]
iv
The dream which follows is an instance of really low egoistic feelings
concealed behind affectionate worry.
My friend Otto was looking ill. His face was brown and he had protrud-
ing eyes.286 V. Material and Sources of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 286Otto is my family doctor, and I owe him more than I can ever hope to
repay: he has watched over my children’s health for many years, he has
treated them successfully when they have been ill, and, in addition, when-ever circumstances have given him an excuse, he has given them presents.[See p. 140.] He had visited us on the dream-day, and my wife had re-marked that he looked tired and strained. That night I had my dream,which showed him with some of the signs of Basedow’s [Graves’] disease.Anyone who interprets this dream without regard for my rules will con-clude that I was worried about my friend’s health and that this worry wasrealized in the dream. This would not only contradict my assertion thatdreams are wish-fulﬁlments, but my other assertion, too, that they are ac-cessible only to egoistic impulses. But I should be glad if anyone interpret-ing the dream in this way would be good enough to explain to me why myfears on Otto’s behalf should have lighted on Basedow’s disease—a diagno-
sis for which his actual appearance gives not the slightest ground. Myanalysis, on the other hand, brought up the following material from an oc-currence six years earlier. A small group of us, which included Professor R.,were driving in pitch darkness through the forest of N., which lay somehours’ drive from the place at which we were spending our summer holi-days. The coachman, who was not perfectly sober, spilt us, carriage and all,over an embankment, and it was only by a piece of luck that we all escapedinjury. We were obliged, however, to spend the night in a neighbouringinn, at which the news of our accident brought us a lot of sympathy. A gen-tleman, with unmistakable signs of Basedow’s disease—incidentally, just asin the dream, only the brown discoloration of the skin of the face and theprotruding eyes, but no goitre—placed himself entirely at our disposal andasked what he could do for us. Professor R. replied in his decisive manner:‘Nothing except to lend me a nightshirt.’ To which the ﬁne gentleman re-joined: ‘I’m sorry, but I can’t do that,’ and left the room.
As I continued my analysis, it occurred to me that Basedow was the
name not only of a physician but also of a famous educationalist. (In mywaking state I no longer felt quite so certain about this.
1) But my friend
Otto was the person whom I had asked to watch over my children’s phys-ical education, especially at the age of puberty (hence the nightshirt), incase anything happened to me. By giving my friend Otto in the dreamthe symptoms of our noble helper, I was evidently saying that if anythinghappened to me he would do just as little for the children as Baron L. had287 D. Typical Dreams
1[Though in fact it was correct. He was an eighteenth-century follower of Rousseau.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 287done on that occasion in spite of his kind offers of assistance. This seems
to be sufﬁcient evidence of the egoistic lining of the dream.1
But where was its wish-fulﬁlment to be found? Not in my avenging my-
self on my friend Otto, whose fate it seems to be to be ill-treated in mydreams
2; but in the following consideration. At the same time as I repre-
sented Otto in the dream as Baron L., I had identiﬁed myself with some-one else, namely Professor R.; for just as in the anecdote R. had made arequest to Baron L., so I had made a request to Otto. And that is the point.Professor R., with whom I should really not venture to compare myself inthe ordinary way, resembled me in having followed an independent pathoutside the academic world and had only achieved his well-merited titlelate in life. So once again I was wanting to be a Professor! Indeed the words‘late in life’ were themselves a wish-fulﬁlment; for they implied that Ishould live long enough to see my boys through the age of puberty myself.
3
(γ) Other Typical Dreams
I have no experience of my own of other kinds of typical dreams, in
which the dreamer ﬁnds himself ﬂying through the air to the accompani-ment of agreeable feelings or falling with feelings of anxiety; and whatever288 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1911:] When Ernest Jones was giving a scientiﬁc lecture on the
egoism of dreams before an American audience, a learned lady objected to this
unscientiﬁc generalization, saying that the author of the present work could onlyjudge of the dreams of Austrians and had no business to speak of the dreams ofAmericans. So far as she was concerned, she was certain that all her dreams werestrictly altruistic.—[ Added 1925:] By way of excuse for this patriotic lady, I may
remark that the statement that dreams are entirely egoistic [p. 284 f.] must notbe misunderstood. Since anything whatever that occurs in preconscious thoughtcan pass into a dream (whether into its actual content or into the latent dream-thoughts) that possibility is equally open to altruistic impulses. In the same way,an affectionate or erotic impulse towards someone else, if it is present in the un-conscious, can appear in a dream. The truth in the assertion made in the textabove is thus restricted to the fact that among the unconscious instigators of adream we very frequently ﬁnd egoistic impulses which seem to have been over-come in waking life.
2 [Cf. the dream of Irma’s injection in Chapter II (pp. 131 ff.).]
3 [This dream is further discussed on pp. 556 and 560.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 288I have to say on the subject is derived from psycho-analyses.1The infor-
mation provided by the latter forces me to conclude that these dreams,
too, reproduce impressions of childhood; they relate, that is, to games in-volving movement, which are extraordinarily attractive to children. Therecannot be a single uncle who has not shown a child how to ﬂy by rushingacross the room with him in his outstretched arms, or who has not playedat letting him fall by riding him on his knee and then suddenly stretchingout his leg, or by holding him up high and then suddenly pretending todrop him. Children are delighted by such experiences and never tire ofasking to have them repeated, especially if there is something about themthat causes a little fright or giddiness. In after years they repeat these expe-riences in dreams; but in the dreams they leave out the hands which heldthem up, so that they ﬂoat, or fall unsupported. The delight taken byyoung children in games of this kind (as well as in swings and see-saws) iswell known; and when they come to see acrobatic feats in a circus theirmemory of such games is revived.
2Hysterical attacks in boys sometimes
consist merely in reproductions of feats of this kind, carried out with greatskill. It not uncommonly happens that these games of movement, thoughinnocent in themselves, give rise to sexual feelings.
3Childish ‘romping’289 D. Typical Dreams
1 [The ﬁrst sentence of this paragraph appeared in the original edition (1900) but
was thereafter dropped until 1925. The remainder of the paragraph, together
with the next one, were added in 1909, and in 1914 transferred to Chapter VI,Section E (where they will also be found, on p. 404 below). In the 1930 editionthey were included in both places.]
2 [Footnote added 1925:] Analytic research has shown us that in addition to pleasure
derived from the organs concerned, there is another factor which contributes tothe delight taken by children in acrobatic performances and to their repetition inhysterical attacks. This other factor is a memory-image, often unconscious, of anobservation of sexual intercourse, whether between human beings or animals.
3 A young medical colleague, who is quite free from any kind of nervous trouble,
has given me the following information on this point: ‘I know from my own ex-perience that in my childhood I had a peculiar sensation in my genitals when Iwas on a swing and especially when the downward motion reached its greatestmomentum. And though I cannot say I really enjoyed this sensation I must de-scribe it as a pleasurable one.’—Patients have often told me that the ﬁrst pleas-urable erections that they can remember occurred in their boyhood while theywere climbing about.—Psycho-analysis makes it perfectly certain that the ﬁrstsexual impulses frequently have their roots in games involving romping andwrestling played during childhood. [This topic was elaborated by Freud in thelast section of the second of his Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d ).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 289[‘Hetzen ’], if I may use a word which commonly describes all such activi-
ties, is what is being repeated in dreams of ﬂying, falling, giddiness and so
on; while the pleasurable feelings attached to these experiences are trans-formed into anxiety. But often enough, as every mother knows, rompingamong children actually ends in squabbling and tears.
Thus I have good grounds for rejecting the theory that what provokes
dreams of ﬂying and falling is the state of our tactile feelings during sleepor sensations of the movement of our lungs, and so on. [Cf. pp. 69 f.] Inmy view these sensations are themselves reproduced as part of the mem-ory to which the dream goes back: that is to say, they are part of the con-
tentof the dream and not its source.
I cannot, however, disguise from myself that I am unable to produce
any complete explanation of this class of typical dreams.
1My material has
left me in the lurch precisely at this point. I must, however, insist upon thegeneral assertion that all the tactile and motor sensations which occur inthese typical dreams are called up immediately there is any psychical reasonfor making use of them and that they can be disregarded when no suchneed for them arises. [Cf. p. 257.] I am also of the opinion that the relationof these dreams to infantile experiences has been established with certaintyfrom the indications I have found in the analyses of psychoneurotics. I amnot able to say, however, what other meanings may become attached to therecollection of such sensations in the course of later life—different mean-ings, perhaps, in every individual case, in spite of the typical appearance ofthe dreams; and I should be glad to be able to ﬁll up the gap by a carefulanalysis of clear instances. If anyone feels surprised that, in spite of the fre-quency precisely of dreams of ﬂying, falling and pulling out teeth, etc., Ishould be complaining of lack of material on this particular topic, I mustexplain that I myself have not experienced any dreams of the kind since Iturned my attention to the subject of dream-interpretation. The dreams ofneurotics, moreover, of which I might otherwise avail myself, cannot al-ways be interpreted—not, at least, in many cases, so as to reveal the wholeof their concealed meaning; a particular psychical force, which was con-cerned with the original constructing of the neurosis and is brought intooperation once again when attempts are made at resolving it, prevents usfrom interpreting such dreams down to their last secret.290 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [In the original edition (1900) the following paragraph (the ﬁrst on examination
dreams) preceded this one, and the present paragraph concluded the chapter.
Thereafter this paragraph was altogether omitted until 1925.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 290(δ) Examination Dreams
Everyone who has passed the Matriculation examination at the end of his
school studies complains of the obstinacy with which he is pursued byanxiety-dreams of having failed, or of being obliged to take the examina-tion again, etc. In the case of those who have obtained a University degreethis typical dream is replaced by another one which represents them ashaving failed in their University Finals; and it is in vain that they object,even while they are still asleep, that for years they have been practisingmedicine or working as University lecturers or heads of ofﬁces. The in-eradicable memories of the punishments that we suffered for our evildeeds in childhood become active within us once more and attach them-selves to the two crucial points in our studies—the ‘ dies irae, dies illa’ of
our stiffest examinations. The ‘examination anxiety’ of neurotics owes itsintensiﬁcation to these same childhood fears. After we have ceased to beschool-children, our punishments are no longer inﬂicted on us by ourparents or by those who brought us up or later by our schoolmasters. Therelentless causal chains of real life take charge of our further education,and now we dream of Matriculation or Finals (and who has not trembledon those occasions, even if he was well-prepared for the examination?)whenever, having done something wrong or failed to do something prop-erly, we expect to be punished by the event—whenever, in short, we feelthe burden of responsibility.
For a further explanation of examination dreams
1I have to thank an
experienced colleague [Stekel], who once declared at a scientiﬁc meetingthat so far as he knew dreams of Matriculation only occur in people whohave successfully passed it and never in people who have failed in it. Itwould seem, then, that anxious examination dreams (which, as has beenconﬁrmed over and over again, appear when the dreamer has some re-sponsible activity ahead of him next day and is afraid there may be a ﬁ-asco) search for some occasion in the past in which great anxiety hasturned out to be unjustiﬁed and has been contradicted by the event. This,then, would be a very striking instance of the content of a dream beingmisunderstood by the waking agency. [See pp. 262.] What is regarded as291 D. Typical Dreams
1 [This paragraph and the next one were added in 1909. In the editions of 1909
and 1911 only, the words ‘the true explanation’ took the place of ‘a further
 explanation.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 291an indignant protest against the dream: ‘But I’m a doctor, etc., already!’
would in reality be the consolation put forward by the dream, and wouldaccordingly run: ‘Don’t be afraid of tomorrow! Just think how anxiousyou were before your Matriculation, and yet nothing happened to you.You’re a doctor, etc., already.’ And the anxiety which is attributed to thedream would really have arisen from the day’s residues.
Such tests as I have been able to make of this explanation on myself
and on other people, though they have not been sufﬁciently numerous,have conﬁrmed its validity. For instance, I myself failed in Forensic Med-icine in my Finals; but I have never had to cope with this subject indreams, whereas I have quite often been examined in Botany, Zoology orChemistry. I went in for the examination in these subjects with well-founded anxiety; but, whether by the grace of destiny or of the examiners,I escaped punishment. In my dreams of school examinations, I am invari-ably examined in History, in which I did brilliantly—though only, it istrue, because [in the oral examination] my kindly master (the one-eyedbenefactor of another dream, see p. 50) did not fail to notice that on thepaper of questions which I handed him back I had run my ﬁngernailthrough the middle one of the three questions included, to warn him notto insist upon that particular one. One of my patients, who decided notto sit for his Matriculation the ﬁrst time but passed it later, and who sub-sequently failed in his army examination and never got a commission, hastold me that he often dreams of the former of these examinations butnever of the latter.
1
The interpretation of examination dreams is faced by the difﬁculty
which I have already referred to as characteristic of the majority of typicaldreams [p. 259].
2It is but rarely that the material with which the dreamer292 V. Material and Sources of Dreams
1 [At this point in the 1909 edition the following paragraph appeared: ‘The col-
league whom I have mentioned above (Dr. Stekel) has drawn attention to the
fact that the word we use for Matriculation, “ Matura ,” also means “maturity”;
he claims to have observed that “ Matura ” dreams very often appear when a sex-
ual test lies ahead for the next day, when, that is, the ﬁasco that is dreaded maylie in an insufﬁcient release of potency.’ In the 1911 edition the following sen-tence was added: ‘A German colleague has, as I think rightly, objected to thisthat the name of this examination in Germany—“Abiturium”—does not bear
this double meaning.’ This whole paragraph was omitted from 1914 onwards.In 1925 it was replaced by the new ﬁnal paragraph of the chapter. The subjectwas discussed by Stekel himself in 1909, 464 and 471.]
2 [This paragraph was added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 292provides us in associations is sufﬁcient to interpret the dream. It is only by
collecting a considerable number of examples of such dreams that we canarrive at a better understanding of them. Not long ago I came to the con-clusion that the objection ‘You’re a doctor, etc., already’ does not merelyconceal a consolation but also signiﬁes a reproach. This would have run:‘You’re quite old now, quite far advanced in life, and yet you go on doingthese stupid, childish things.’ This mixture of self-criticism and consola-tion would thus correspond to the latent content of examination dreams.If so, it would not be surprising if the self-reproaches for being ‘stupid’ and‘childish’ in these last examples referred to the repetition of reprehensiblesexual acts.
Wilhelm Stekel,
1who put forward the ﬁrst interpretation of dreams of
Matriculation [‘ Matura ’], was of the opinion that they regularly related
to sexual tests and sexual maturity. My experience has often conﬁrmed hisview.
2293 D. Typical Dreams
1 [This paragraph was added in 1925.]
2 [In the 1909 and 1911 editions this chapter was continued with a discussion of
other kinds of ‘typical’ dreams. But from 1914 onwards this further discussion was
transferred to Chapter VI, Section E, after the newly introduced material dealingwith dream-symbolism. See p. 394 f. below. (Cf. Editor’s Introduction, p. xiii.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 2939780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 294CHAPTER VI
THE DREAM-WORK1
Every attempt that has hitherto been made to solve the problem of
dreams has dealt directly with their manifest content as it is presented in
our memory. All such attempts have endeavoured to arrive at an interpre-tation of dreams from their manifest content or (if no interpretation was
attempted) to form a judgement as to their nature on the basis of thatsame manifest content. We are alone in taking something else into ac-count. We have introduced a new class of psychical material between themanifest content of dreams and the conclusions of our enquiry: namely,their latent content, or (as we say) the ‘dream-thoughts,’ arrived at by
means of our procedure. It is from these dream-thoughts and not from adream’s manifest content that we disentangle its meaning. We are thuspresented with a new task which had no previous existence: the task, thatis, of investigating the relations between the manifest content of dreamsand the latent dream-thoughts, and of tracing out the processes by whichthe latter have been changed into the former.
The dream-thoughts and the dream-content are presented to us like two
versions of the same subject-matter in two different languages. Or, moreproperly, the dream-content seems like a transcript of the dream-thoughtsinto another mode of expression, whose characters and syntactic laws it isour business to discover by comparing the original and the translation. The
2951 [Lecture XI of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916–17) deals with the dream-
work on a much less extensive scale.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 295dream-thoughts are immediately comprehensible, as soon as we have learnt
them. The dream-content, on the other hand, is expressed as it were in apictographic script, the characters of which have to be transposed individ-ually into the language of the dream-thoughts. If we attempted to readthese characters according to their pictorial value instead of according totheir symbolic relation, we should clearly be led into error. Suppose I havea picture-puzzle, a rebus, in front of me. It depicts a house with a boat onits roof, a single letter of the alphabet, the ﬁgure of a running man whosehead has been conjured away, and so on. Now I might be misled into rais-ing objections and declaring that the picture as a whole and its componentparts are nonsensical. A boat has no business to be on the roof of a house,and a headless man cannot run. Moreover, the man is bigger than thehouse; and if the whole picture is intended to represent a landscape, lettersof the alphabet are out of place in it since such objects do not occur in na-ture. But obviously we can only form a proper judgement of the rebus ifwe put aside criticisms such as these of the whole composition and its partsand if, instead, we try to replace each separate element by a syllable or wordthat can be represented by that element in some way or other. The wordswhich are put together in this way are no longer nonsensical but may forma poetical phrase of the greatest beauty and signiﬁcance. A dream is a picture-puzzle of this sort and our predecessors in the ﬁeld of dream- interpretation have made the mistake of treating the rebus as a pictorialcomposition: and as such it has seemed to them nonsensical and worthless.
(A)
THE WORK OF CONDENSATION
The ﬁrst thing that becomes clear to anyone who compares the dream-
content with the dream-thoughts is that a work of condensation on a large
scale has been carried out. Dreams are brief, meagre and laconic in com-parison with the range and wealth of the dream-thoughts. If a dream iswritten out it may perhaps ﬁll half a page. The analysis setting out thedream-thoughts underlying it may occupy six, eight or a dozen times asmuch space. This relation varies with different dreams; but so far as myexperience goes its direction never varies. As a rule one underestimates theamount of compression that has taken place, since one is inclined to re-296 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 296gard the dream-thoughts that have been brought to light as the complete
material, whereas if the work of interpretation is carried further it may re-veal still more thoughts concealed behind the dream I have already hadoccasion to point out [cf. pp. 252 f.] that it is in fact never possible to besure that a dream has been completely interpreted.
1Even if the solution
seems satisfactory and without gaps, the possibility always remains thatthe dream may have yet another meaning. Strictly speaking, then, it isimpossible to determine the amount of condensation.
There is an answer, which at ﬁrst sight seems most plausible, to the ar-
gument that the great lack of proportion between the dream-content andthe dream-thoughts implies that the psychical material has undergone anextensive process of condensation in the course of the formation of thedream. We very often have an impression that we have dreamt a great dealall through the night and have since forgotten most of what we dreamt.On this view, the dream which we remember when we wake up wouldonly be a fragmentary remnant of the total dream-work; and this, if wecould recollect it in its entirety, might well be as extensive as the dream-thoughts. There is undoubtedly some truth in this: there can be no ques-tion that dreams can be reproduced most accurately if we try to recallthem as soon as we wake up and that our memory of them becomes moreand more incomplete towards evening. But on the other hand it can beshown that the impression that we have dreamt a great deal more than wecan reproduce is very often based on an illusion, the origin of which Ishall discuss later. [Cf. pp. 494 and 520.] Moreover the hypothesis thatcondensation occurs during the dream-work is not affected by the possi-bility of dreams being forgotten, since this hypothesis is proved to be cor-rect by the quantities of ideas which are related to each individual pieceof the dream which has been retained. Even supposing that a large pieceof the dream has escaped recollection, this may merely have preventedour having access to another group of dream-thoughts. There is no justi-ﬁcation for supposing that the lost pieces of the dream would have relatedto the same thoughts which we have already reached from the pieces ofthe dream that have survived.
2297 A. The Work of Condensation
1 [This subject is discussed at length in Freud, 1925 i, Section A.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] The occurrence of condensation in dreams has been
hinted at by many writers. Du Prel (1885, 85) has a passage in which he says it
is absolutely certain that there has been a process of condensation of the groupsof ideas in dreams.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 297In view of the very great number of associations produced in analysis
to each individual element of the content of a dream, some readers may be
led to doubt whether, as a matter of principle, we are justiﬁed in regardingas part of the dream-thoughts all the associations that occur to us duringthe subsequent analysis—whether we are justiﬁed, that is, in supposingthat all these thoughts were already active during the state of sleep andplayed a part in the formation of the dream. Is it not more probable thatnew trains of thought have arisen in the course of the analysis which hadno share in forming the dream? I can only give limited assent to this argu-ment. It is no doubt true that some trains of thought arise for the ﬁrst timeduring the analysis. But one can convince oneself in all such cases thatthese new connections are only set up between thoughts which were al-ready linked in some other way in the dream-thoughts.
1The new connec-
tions are, as it were, loop-lines or short-circuits, made possible by theexistence of other and deeper-lying connecting paths. It must be allowedthat the great bulk of the thoughts which are revealed in analysis were al-ready active during the process of forming the dream; for, after workingthrough a string of thoughts which seem to have no connection with theformation of a dream, one suddenly comes upon one which is representedin its content and is indispensable for its interpretation, but which couldnot have been reached except by this particular line of approach. I mayhere recall the dream of the botanical monograph [pp. 193 ff.], whichstrikes one as the product of an astonishing amount of condensation, eventhough I have not reported its analysis in full.
How, then, are we to picture psychical conditions during the period of
sleep which precedes dreams? Are all the dream-thoughts present along-side one another? or do they occur in sequence? or do a number of trainsof thoughts start out simultaneously from different centres and afterwardsunite? There is no need for the present, in my opinion, to form any plas-tic idea of psychical conditions during the formation of dreams. It mustnot be forgotten, however, that we are dealing with an unconscious process
of thought, which may easily be different from what we perceive duringpurposive reﬂection accompanied by consciousness.298 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This question is mentioned again on pp. 326 f. and discussed at very much
greater length in the last part of Section A of Chapter VII (pp. 529 f.). See espe-
cially pp. 534 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 298The unquestionable fact remains, however, that the formation of
dreams is based on a process of condensation. How is that condensation
brought about?
When we reﬂect that only a small minority of all the dream-thoughts re-
vealed are represented in the dream by one of their ideational elements, wemight conclude that condensation is brought about by omission: that is, that
the dream is not a faithful translation or a point-for-point projection of thedream-thoughts, but a highly incomplete and fragmentary version of them.This view, as we shall soon discover, is a most inadequate one. But we maytake it as a provisional starting-point and go on to a further question. If onlya few elements from the dream-thoughts ﬁnd their way into the dream-con-tent, what are the conditions which determine their selection?
In order to get some light on this question we must turn our attention
to those elements of the dream-content which must have fulﬁlled theseconditions. And the most favourable material for such an investigationwill be a dream to the construction of which a particularly intense processof condensation has contributed. I shall accordingly begin by choosingfor the purpose the dream which I have already recorded on pp. 193 ff.
i
T he Dream of the Botanical Monograph
Content of the Dream. —I had written a monograph on an (unspec-
iﬁed) genus of plants. The book lay before me and I was at the moment turn-ing over a folded coloured plate. Bound up in the copy there was a driedspecimen of the plant.
The element in this dream which stood out most was the botanical
monograph. This arose from the impressions of the dream-day: I had infact seen a monograph on the genus Cyclamen in the window of a book-shop. There was no mention of this genus in the content of the dream; allthat was left in it was the monograph and its relation to botany. The‘botanical monograph’ immediately revealed its connection with the work
upon cocaine which I had once written. From ‘cocaine’ the chains of
thought led on the one hand to the Festschrift and to certain events in a
University laboratory, and on the other hand to my friend Dr. Königstein,299 A. The Work of Condensation9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 299the eye surgeon, who had had a share in the introduction of cocaine. The
ﬁgure of Dr. Königstein further reminded me of the interrupted conversa-tion which I had had with him the evening before and of my various re-ﬂections upon the payment for medical services among colleagues. Thisconversation was the actual currently active instigator of the dream; themonograph on the Cyclamen was also a currently active impression, butone of an indifferent nature. As I perceived, the ‘botanical monograph’ inthe dream turned out to be an ‘intermediate common entity’ between thetwo experiences of the previous day: it was taken over unaltered from theindifferent impression and was linked with the psychically signiﬁcantevent by copious associative connections.
Not only the compound idea, ‘botanical monograph,’ however, but
each of its components, ‘botanical’ and ‘monograph’ separately, led by nu-merous connecting paths deeper and deeper into the tangle of dream-thoughts. ‘Botanical’ was related to the ﬁgure of Professor Gärtner
[Gardener], the blooming looks of his wife, to my patient Flora and to the
lady [Frau L.] of whom I had told the story of the forgotten ﬂowers . Gärt-
ner led in turn to the laboratory and to my conversation with Königstein.My two patients [Flora and Frau L.] had been mentioned in the course ofthis conversation. A train of thought joined the lady with the ﬂowers tomy wife’s favourite ﬂowers and thence to the title of the monograph which
I had seen for a moment during the day. In addition to these, ‘botanical’recalled an episode at my secondary school and an examination while Iwas at the University. A fresh topic touched upon in my conversation withDr. Königstein—my favourite hobbies—was joined, through the interme-
diate link of what I jokingly called my favourite ﬂower , the artichoke, with
the train of thought proceeding from the forgotten ﬂowers. Behind ‘arti-chokes’ lay, on the one hand, my thoughts about Italy
1and, on the other
hand, a scene from my childhood which was the opening of what havesince become my intimate relations with books. Thus ‘botanical’ was aregular nodal point in the dream. Numerous trains of thought convergedupon it, which, as I can guarantee, had appropriately entered into the con-text of the conversation with Dr. Königstein. Here we ﬁnd ourselves in afactory of thoughts where, as in the ‘weaver’s masterpiece’—300 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This seems to be a reference to an element in the dream-thoughts not previ-
ously mentioned.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 300Ein T ritt tausend Fäden regt,
Die Schifﬂein herüber hinüber schiessen,Die Fäden ungesehen ﬂiessen,Ein Schlag tausend Verbindungen schlägt.
1
So, too, ‘monograph’ in the dream touches upon two subjects: the one-sidedness of my studies and the costliness of my favourite hobbies.
This ﬁrst investigation leads us to conclude that the elements ‘botanical’
and ‘monograph’ found their way into the content of the dream becausethey possessed copious contacts with the majority of the dream-thoughts,because, that is to say, they constituted ‘nodal points’ upon which a greatnumber of the dream-thoughts converged, and because they had severalmeanings in connection with the interpretation of the dream. The expla-nation of this fundamental fact can also be put in another way: each of theelements of the dream’s content turns out to have been ‘overdetermined’—to have been represented in the dream-thoughts many times over.
We discover still more when we come to examine the remaining con-
stituents of the dream in relation to their appearance in the dream-thoughts. The coloured plate which I was unfolding led (see the analysis,
pp. 195 f.) to a new topic, my colleagues’ criticisms of my activities, andto one which was already represented in the dream, my favourite hobbies;and it led, in addition, to the childhood memory in which I was pullingto pieces a book with coloured plates. The dried specimen of the planttouched upon the episode of the herbarium at my secondary school andspecially stressed that memory.
The nature of the relation between dream-content and dream-thoughts
thus becomes visible. Not only are the elements of a dream determined bythe dream-thoughts many times over, but the individual dream-thoughts arerepresented in the dream by several elements. Associative paths lead fromone element of the dream to several dream-thoughts, and from one dream-thought to several elements of the dream. Thus a dream is not constructed301 A. The Work of Condensation
1 [. . . a thousand threads one treadle throws,
Where ﬂy the shuttles hither and thither,
Unseen the threads are knit together,And an inﬁnite combination grows.
Goethe, Faust , Part I [Scene 4]
(Bayard Taylor’s translation).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 301by each individual dream-thought, or group of dream-thoughts, ﬁnding (in
abbreviated form) separate representation in the content of the dream—inthe kind of way in which an electorate chooses parliamentary representatives;a dream is constructed, rather, by the whole mass of dream-thoughts beingsubmitted to a sort of manipulative process in which those elements whichhave the most numerous and strongest supports acquire the right of entryinto the dream-content—in a manner analogous to election by scrutin deliste. In the case of every dream which I have submitted to an analysis of thiskind I have invariably found these same fundamental principles conﬁrmed:the elements of the dream are constructed out of the whole mass of dream-thoughts and each one of those elements is shown to have been determinedmany times over in relation to the dream-thoughts.
It will certainly not be out of place to illustrate the connection be-
tween dream-content and dream-thoughts by a further example, which isdistinguished by the specially ingenious interweaving of their reciprocalrelations. It is a dream produced by one of my patients—a man whom Iwas treating for claustrophobia. It will soon become clear why I have cho-sen to give this exceptionally clever dream-production the title of
ii
‘A Lovely Dream’
He was driving with a large party to X Street, in which there was an unpre-tentious inn. (This is not the case.) There was a play being acted inside it.
At one moment he was audience, at another actor. When it was over, they hadto change their clothes so as to get back to town. Some of the company wereshown into rooms on the ground ﬂoor and others into rooms on the ﬁrst ﬂoor.Then a dispute broke out. The ones up above were angry because the onesdown below were not ready, and they could not come downstairs. His brotherwas up above and he was down below and he was angry with his brother be-cause they were so much pressed. (This part was obscure.) Moreover, it had
been decided and arranged even when they ﬁrst arrived who was to be upabove and who was to be down below. Then he was walking by himself upthe rise made by X Street in the direction of town. He walked with such difﬁ-culty and so laboriously that he seemed glued to the spot. An elderly gentleman302 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 302came up to him and began abusing the King of Italy. At the top of the rise he
was able to walk much more easily.
His difﬁculty in walking up the rise was so distinct that after waking
up he was for some time in doubt whether it was a dream or reality.
We should not think very highly of this dream, judging by its manifest
content. In deﬁance of the rules, I shall begin its interpretation with theportion which the dreamer described as being the most distinct.
The difﬁculty which he dreamt of and probably actually experienced
during the dream—the laborious climbing up the rise accompanied bydyspnoea—was one of the symptoms which the patient had in fact exhib-ited years before and which had at that time been attributed, along withcertain other symptoms, to tuberculosis. (The probability is that this washysterically simulated.) The peculiar sensation of inhibited movementthat occurs in this dream is already familiar to us from dreams of exhibit-ing [see pp. 261 ff.] and we see once more that it is material available atany time for any other representational purpose. [Cf. p. 350 f.] The pieceof the dream-content which described how the climb began by being dif-ﬁcult and became easy at the end of the rise reminded me, when I heardit, of the masterly introduction to Alphonse Daudet’s Sappho. That well-
known passage describes how a young man carries his mistress upstairs inhis arms; at ﬁrst she is as light as a feather, but the higher he climbs theheavier grows her weight. The whole scene foreshadows the course oftheir love-affair, which was intended by Daudet as a warning to youngmen not to allow their affections to be seriously engaged by girls of hum-ble origin and a dubious past.
1Though I knew that my patient had been
involved in a love-affair which he had recently broken off with a lady onthe stage, I did not expect to ﬁnd my guess at an interpretation justiﬁed.Moreover the situation in Sappho was the reverse of what it had been in
the dream. In the dream the climbing had been difﬁcult to begin withand had afterwards become easy; whereas the symbolism in the novel onlymade sense if something that had been begun lightly ended by becominga heavy burden. But to my astonishment my patient replied that my in-terpretation ﬁtted in very well with a piece he had seen at the theatre theevening before. It was called Rund um Wien [Round Vienna] and gave a303 A. The Work of Condensation
1 [Footnote added 1911:] What I have written below in the section on symbolism
about the signiﬁcance of dreams of climbing [p. 368 n. 2] throws light upon the
imagery chosen by the novelist.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 303picture of the career of a girl who began by being respectable, who then
became a demi-mondaine and had liaisons with men in high positions and
so ‘went up in the world ,’ but who ended by ‘coming down in the world .’
The piece had moreover reminded him of another, which he had seensome years earlier, called Von Stufe zu Stufe [Step by Step ], and which had
been advertised by a poster showing a staircase with a ﬂight of steps.
To continue with the interpretation. The actress with whom he had
had this latest, eventful liaison had lived in X Street. There is nothing in
the nature of an inn in that street. But when he was spending part ofthe summer in Vienna on the lady’s account he had put up [German‘abgestiegen,’ literally ‘stepped down ’] at a small hotel in the neighbour-
hood. When he left the hotel he had said to his cab-driver: ‘Anyhow I’mlucky not to have picked up any vermin.’ (This, incidentally, was anotherof his phobias.) To this the driver had replied: ‘How could anyone put upat such a place! It’s not a hotel, it’s only an inn.’
The idea of an inn at once recalled a quotation to his mind:
Bei einem Wirte wundermild,
Da war ich jüngst zu Gaste.
1
The host in Uhland’s poem was an apple-tree; and a second quotation
now carried on his train of thought:
Faust (mit der Jungen tanzend ):
Einst hatt’ ich einen schönen T raum;
Da sah ich einen Apfelbaum,
Zwei schöne Äpfel glänzten dran,
Sie reizten mich, ich stieg hinan.
Die Shöne:
Der Äpfelchen begehrt ihr sehr,Und schon vom Paradiese her.Von Freuden fühl’ ich mich bewegt,Dass auch mein Garten solche trägt.
2304 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Literally: ‘I was lately a guest at an inn with a most gentle host’.
(Uhland, Wanderlieder, 8, ‘Einkehr.’)]
2 [FAUST (dancing with the Young Witch ):
A lovely dream once came to me,
And I beheld an apple-tree,9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 304There cannot be the faintest doubt what the apple-tree and the apples
stood for. Moreover, lovely breasts had been among the charms whichhad attracted the dreamer to his actress.
The context of the analysis gave us every ground for supposing that
the dream went back to an impression in childhood. If so, it must havereferred to the wet-nurse of the dreamer, who was by then a man almostthirty years old. For an infant the breasts of his wet-nurse are nothingmore nor less than an inn. The wet-nurse, as well as Daudet’s Sappho,seem to have been allusions to the mistress whom the patient had recentlydropped.
The patient’s (elder) brother also appeared in the content of the dream,
the brother being up above and the patient himself down below. This was
once again the reverse of the actual situation; for, as I knew, the brotherhad lost his social position while the patient had maintained his. In repeat-ing the content of the dream to me, the dreamer had avoided saying thathis brother was up above and he himself ‘on the ground ﬂoor.’ That wouldhave put the position too clearly, since here in Vienna if we say someone is‘on the ground ﬂoor ’ we mean that he has lost his money and his position—
in other words, that he has ‘come down in the world.’ Now there must havebeen a reason for some of this part of the dream being represented by itsreverse . Further, the reversal must hold good of some other relation be-
tween dream-thoughts and dream-content as well [cf. below, pp. 341 f.];and we have a hint of where to look for this reversal. It must evidently beat the end of the dream, where once again there was a reversal of the difﬁ-culty in going upstairs as described in Sappho. We can then easily see what
reversal is intended. In Sappho the man carried a woman who was in a sex-
ual relation to him; in the dream-thoughts the position was reversed , and a
woman was carrying a man. And since this can only happen in childhood,the reference was once more to the wet-nurse bearing the weight of the305 A. The Work of Condensation
On which two lovely apples shone;
They charmed me so, I climbed thereon .
THELOVELY WITCH:
Apples have been desired by you,Since ﬁrst in Paradise they grew;And I am moved with joy to knowThat such within my garden grow.
Goethe, Faust , Part I [Scene 21, Walpurgisnacht]
(Bayard Taylor’s translation, slightly modiﬁed).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 305 infant in her arms. Thus the end of the dream made a simultaneous refer-
ence to Sappho and to the  wet-nurse.
Just as the author of the novel, in choosing the name ‘Sappho,’ had in
mind an allusion to Lesbian practices, so too the pieces of the dream thatspoke of people ‘ up above’ and ‘down below’ alluded to phantasies of a sex-
ual nature which occupied the patient’s mind and, as suppressed desires,were not without a bearing on his neurosis. (The interpretation of thedream did not itself show us that what were thus represented in thedream were phantasies and not recollections of real events; an analysisonly gives us the content of a thought and leaves it to us to determine its
reality. Real and imaginary events appear in dreams at ﬁrst sight as ofequal validity; and that is so not only in dreams but in the production ofmore important psychical structures.)
1
A ‘large party’ meant, as we already know [see pp. 263 f.], a secret. His
brother was simply the representative (introduced into the childhoodscene by a ‘retrospective phantasy’)
2of all his later rivals for a woman’s af-
fection. The episode of the gentleman who abused the King of Italy re-lated once again, via the medium of a recent and in itself indifferent
experience, to people of lower rank pushing their way into higher society.It was just as though the child at the breast was being given a warningparallel to the one which Daudet had given to young men.
3
To provide a third opportunity for studying condensation in the for-
mation of dreams, I will give part of the analysis of another dream, whichI owe to an elderly lady undergoing psycho-analytic treatment. As was tobe expected from the severe anxiety-states from which the patient suf-fered, her dreams contained a very large number of sexual thoughts, theﬁrst realization of which both surprised and alarmed her. Since I shall not306 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Freud is probably referring here to the discovery which he had recently made
that the infantile sexual traumas apparently revealed in his analyses of neurotic
patients were in fact very often phantasies. See Freud, 1906a.]
2 [Phantasies of this kind had been discussed by Freud previously, in the latter part
of his paper on ‘Screen Memories’ (1899a).]
3 The imaginary nature of the situation relating to the dreamer’s wet-nurse was
proved by the objectively established fact that in his case the wet-nurse had beenhis mother. I may recall in this connection the anecdote, which I repeated onp. 226, of the young man who regretted that he had not made better use of hisopportunities with his wet-nurse. A regret of the same kind was no doubt thesource of the present dream.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 306be able to pursue the interpretation of the dream to the end, its material
will appear to fall into several groups without any visible connection.
iii
‘T he May-Beetle1Dream’
Content of the Dream.—She called to mind that she had two may-
beetles in a box and that she must set them free or they would suffocate. Sheopened the box and the may-beetles were in an exhausted state. One of themﬂew out of the open window; but the other was crushed by the casement whileshe was shutting it at someone’s request. (Signs of disgust.)
Analysis.—Her husband was temporarily away from home, and her
fourteen-year-old daughter was sleeping in the bed beside her. Theevening before, the girl had drawn her attention to a moth which hadfallen into her tumbler of water; but she had not taken it out and feltsorry for the poor creature next morning. The book she had been readingduring the evening had told how some boys had thrown a cat into boilingwater, and had described the animal’s convulsions. These were the twoprecipitating causes of the dream—in themselves indifferent. She thenpursued the subject of cruelty to animals further. Some years before, while
they were spending the summer at a particular place, her daughter hadbeen very cruel to animals. She was collecting butterﬂies and asked thepatient for some arsenic to kill them with. On one occasion a moth with
a pin through its body had gone on ﬂying about the room for a long time;another time some caterpillars which the child was keeping to turn intochrysalises starved to death. At a still more tender age the same child usedto tear the wings off beetles and butterﬂies. But today she would be horri-
ﬁed at all these cruel actions—she had grown so kind-hearted.
The patient reﬂected over this contradiction. It reminded her of an-
other contradiction, between appearance and character, as George Eliotdisplays it in Adam Bede : one girl who was pretty, but vain and stupid, and
another who was ugly, but of high character; a nobleman who seduced thesilly girl, and a working man who felt and acted with true nobility. How307 A. The Work of Condensation
1 [The commoner English equivalent for the German ‘Maikäfer’ is ‘cockchafer.’
For the purposes of this dream, however, a literal translation is to be preferred.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 307impossible it was, she remarked, to recognize that sort of thing in people!
Who would have guessed, to look at her, that she was tormented by sen-
sual desires?
In the same year in which the little girl had begun collecting butterﬂies,
the district they were in had suffered from a serious plague of may-beetles .
The children were furious with the beetles and crushed them unmercifully.At that time my patient had seen a man who tore the wings off may- beetlesand then ate their bodies. She herself had been born in May and had been
married in May. Three days after her marriage she had written to her par-
ents at home saying how happy she was. But it had been far from true.
The evening before the dream she had been rummaging among some
old letters and had read some of them—some serious and some comic—aloud to her children. There had been a most amusing letter from a  piano-teacher who had courted her when she was a girl, and another from anadmirer of noble birth .
1
She blamed herself because one of her daughters had got hold of a
‘bad’ book by Maupassant.2The arsenic that the girl had asked for re-
minded her of the arsenic pills which restored the Due de Mora’s youthful
strength in [Daudet’s] Le Nabab.
‘Set them free’ made her think of a passage in the Magic Flute :
Zur Liebe kann ich dich nicht zwingen,Doch geb ich dir die Freiheit nicht.
3
‘May-beetles’ also made her think of Kätchen’s words:
Verliebt ja wie ein Käfer bist du mir.4308 VI. The Dream-Work
1 This had been the true instigator of the dream.
2 An interpolation is required at this point: ‘books of that kind are poison to a girl.’
The patient herself had dipped into forbidden books a great deal when she was
young.
3 [Fear not, to love I’ll ne’er compel thee;
Yet ’tis too soon to set thee free.
(Sarastro to Pamina in the Finale to Act I.—
E. J. Dent’s translation.)]
4 [‘You are madly in love with me.’ Literally: ‘You are in love with me like a beetle .’
From Kleist’s Kätchen von Heilbronn , IV, 2.]—A further train of thought led to
the same poet’s Penthesilea, and to the idea of cruelty to a lover.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 308And in the middle of all this came a quotation from T annhäuser :
Weil du von böser Lust beseelt . . .1
She was living in a perpetual worry about her absent husband. Her
fear that something might happen to him on his journey was expressed
in numerous waking phantasies. A short time before, in the course of heranalysis, she had lighted among her unconscious thoughts upon a com-plaint about her husband ‘growing senile.’ The wishful thought con-cealed by her present dream will perhaps best be conjectured if I mentionthat, some days before she dreamt it, she was horriﬁed, in the middle ofher daily affairs, by a phrase in the imperative mood which came into herhead and was aimed at her husband: ‘Go and hang yourself!’ It turnedout that a few hours earlier she had read somewhere or other that when aman is hanged he gets a powerful erection. The wish for an erection waswhat had emerged from repression in this horrifying disguise. ‘Go andhang yourself !’ was equivalent to: ‘Get yourself an erection at any price!’Dr. Jenkins’s arsenic pills in Le Nabab ﬁtted in here. But my patient wasalso aware that the most powerful aphrodisiac, cantharides (commonlyknown as ‘Spanish ﬂies’), was prepared from crushed beetles. This was the
drift of the principal part of the dream’s content.
The opening and shutting of windows was one of the main subjects of
dispute between her and her husband. She herself was aerophilic in hersleeping habits; her husband was aerophobic. Exhaustion was the chief
symptom which she complained of at the time of the dream.
In all three of the dreams which I have just recorded, I have indicated
by italics the points at which one of the elements of the dream-contentre-appears in the dream-thoughts, so as to show clearly the multiplicityof connections arising from the former. Since, however, the analysis ofnone of these dreams has been traced to its end, it will perhaps be worthwhile to consider a dream whose analysis has been recorded exhaustively,so as to show how its content is over-determined. For this purpose I willtake the dream of Irma’s injection [pp. 131 ff.]. It will be easy to see from309 A. The Work of Condensation
1 [Literally: ‘Because thou wast inspired by such evil pleasure .’ This is presumably
a recollection of the opening phrase of the Pope’s condemnation reported by
Tannhäuser in the last scene of the opera. The actual words are: ‘Hast du so böseLust getheilt’—‘Since thou hast shared such evil pleasure.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 309that example that the work of condensation makes use of more than one
method in the construction of dreams.
The principal ﬁgure in the dream-content was my patient Irma. She
appeared with the features which were hers in real life, and thus, in theﬁrst instance, represented herself. But the position in which I examinedher by the window was derived from someone else, the lady for whom, asthe dream-thoughts showed, I wanted to exchange my patient. In so faras Irma appeared to have a diphtheritic membrane, which recalled myanxiety about my eldest daughter, she stood for that child and, behindher, through her possession of the same name as my daughter, was hiddenthe ﬁgure of my patient who succumbed to poisoning. In the furthercourse of the dream the ﬁgure of Irma acquired still other meanings,without any alteration occurring in the visual picture of her in the dream.She turned into one of the children whom we had examined in the neu-rological department of the children’s hospital, where my two friends re-vealed their contrasting characters. The ﬁgure of my own child wasevidently the stepping-stone towards this transition. The same ‘Irma’s’ re-calcitrance over opening her mouth brought an allusion to another ladywhom I had once examined, and, through the same connection, to mywife. Moreover, the pathological changes which I discovered in her throatinvolved allusions to a whole series of other ﬁgures.
None of these ﬁgures whom I lighted upon by following up ‘Irma’ ap-
peared in the dream in bodily shape. They were concealed behind thedream ﬁgure of ‘Irma,’ which was thus turned into a collective imagewith, it must be admitted, a number of contradictory characteristics. Irmabecame the representative of all these other ﬁgures which had been sacri-ﬁced to the work of condensation, since I passed over to her, point by
point, everything that reminded me of them.
There is another way in which a ‘collective ﬁgure’ can be produced for
purposes of dream-condensation, namely by uniting the actual features oftwo or more people into a single dream-image. It was in this way that theDr. M. of my dream was constructed. He bore the name of Dr. M., hespoke and acted like him; but his physical characteristics and his maladybelonged to someone else, namely to my eldest brother. One single fea-ture, his pale appearance, was doubly determined, since it was commonto both of them in real life.
Dr. R. in my dream about my uncle with the yellow beard [pp. 162 ff.]
was a similar composite ﬁgure. But in his case the dream-image was con-structed in yet another way. I did not combine the features of one person310 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 310with those of another and in the process omit from the memory-picture
certain features of each of them. What I did was to adopt the procedureby means of which Galton produced family portraits: namely by project-ing two images on to a single plate, so that certain features common toboth are emphasized, while those which fail to ﬁt in with one another can-cel one another out and are indistinct in the picture. In my dream aboutmy uncle the fair beard emerged prominently from a face which belongedto two people and which was consequently blurred; incidentally, the beardfurther involved an allusion to my father and myself through the interme-diate idea of growing grey.
The construction of collective and composite ﬁgures is one of the chief
methods by which condensation operates in dreams. I shall presently haveoccasion to deal with them in another context. [See pp. 336 f.]
The occurrence of the idea of ‘dysentery’ in the dream of Irma’s injec-
tion also had a multiple determination: ﬁrst owing to its phonetic simi-larity to ‘diphtheria’ [see p. 138 f.], and secondly owing to its connectionwith the patient whom I had sent to the East and whose hysteria was notrecognized.
Another interesting example of condensation in this dream was the
mention in it of ‘propyls’ [pp. 140]. What was contained in the dream-thoughts was not ‘propyls’ but ‘amyls.’ It might be supposed that a singledisplacement had taken place at this point in the construction of thedream. This was indeed the case. But the displacement served the purposesof condensation, as it proved by the following addition to the analysis ofthe dream. When I allowed my attention to dwell for a moment longer onthe word ‘propyls,’ it occurred to me that it sounded like ‘Propylaea.’ Butthere are Propylaea not only in Athens but in Munich.
1A year before the
dream I had gone to Munich to visit a friend who was seriously ill at thetime—the same friend who was unmistakably alluded to in the dream bythe word ‘trimethylamin’ which occurred immediately after ‘propyls.’
I shall pass over the striking way in which here, as elsewhere in dream-
analyses, associations of the most various inherent importance are usedfor laying down thought-connections as though they were of equalweight, and shall yield to the temptation to give, as it were, a plastic pic-ture of the process by which the amyls in the dream-thoughts were re-placed by propyls in the dream-content.311 A. The Work of Condensation
1 [A ceremonial portico on the model of the Athenian one.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 311On the one hand we see the group of ideas attached to my friend
Otto, who did not understand me, who sided against me, and who made
me a present of liqueur with an aroma of amyl. On the other hand wesee—linked to the former group by its very contrast—the group of ideasattached to my friend in Berlin [Wilhelm Fliess], who didunderstand me,
who would take my side, and to whom I owed so much valuable infor-mation, dealing, amongst other things, with the chemistry of the sexualprocesses.
The recent exciting causes—the actual instigators of the dream—deter-
mined what was to attract my attention in the ‘Otto’ group; the amyl wasamong these selected elements, which were predestined to form part of thedream-content. The copious ‘Wilhelm’ group was stirred up preciselythrough being in contrast to ‘Otto,’ and those elements in it were em -phasized which echoed those which were already stirred up in ‘Otto.’ Allthrough the dream, indeed, I kept on turning from someone who annoyedme to someone else who could be agreeably contrasted with him; point bypoint, I called up a friend against an opponent. Thus the amyl in the‘Otto’ group produced memories from the ﬁeld of chemistry in the othergroup; in this manner the trimethylamin, which was supported from sev-eral directions, found its way into the dream-content. ‘Amyls’ itself mighthave entered the dream-content unmodiﬁed; but it came under the inﬂu-ence of the ‘Wilhelm’ group. For the whole range of memories covered bythat name was searched through in order to ﬁnd some element whichcould provide a two-sided determination for ‘amyls.’ ‘Propyls’ was closelyassociated with ‘amyls,’ and Munich from the ‘Wilhelm’ group with its‘propylaea’ came halfway to meet it. The two groups of ideas converged in‘propyls-propylaea’; and, as though by an act of compromise, this inter-mediate element was what found its way into the dream- content. Here anintermediate common entity had been constructed which admitted ofmultiple determination. It is obvious, therefore, that multiple determina-tion must make it easier for an element to force its way into the dream-content. In order to construct an intermediate link of this kind, attentionis without hesitation displaced from what is actually intended on to someneighbouring association.
Our study of the dream of Irma’s injection has already enabled us to
gain some insight into the processes of condensation during the forma-tion of dreams. We have been able to observe certain of their details, suchas how preference is given to elements that occur several times over in the312 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 312dream-thoughts, how new unities are formed (in the shape of collective
ﬁgures and composite structures), and how intermediate common entitiesare constructed. The further questions of the purpose of condensation and
of the factors which tend to produce it will not be raised till we come toconsider the whole question of the psychical processes at work in the for-mation of dreams. [See pp. 345 f. and Chapter VII, Section E, especiallypp. 592 ff.] We will be content for the present with recognizing the factthat dream-condensation is a notable characteristic of the relation be-tween dream-thoughts and dream-content.
The work of condensation in dreams is seen at its clearest when it han-
dles words and names. It is true in general that words are treated in dreamsas though they were concrete things, and for that reason they are apt tobe combined in just the same way as presentations of concrete things.
1
Dreams of this sort offer the most amusing and curious neologisms.2
i
On one occasion a medical colleague had sent me a paper he had writ-
ten, in which the importance of a recent physiological discovery was, inmy opinion, overestimated, and in which, above all, the subject wastreated in too emotional a manner. The next night I dreamt a sentencewhich clearly referred to this paper: ‘ Its written in a positively norekdal style .’
The analysis of the word caused me some difﬁculty at ﬁrst. There could beno doubt that it was a parody of the [German] superlatives ‘ kolossal ’ and
‘pyramidal ’; but its origin was not so easy to guess. At last I saw that the
monstrosity was composed of the two names ‘Nora’ and  ‘Ekdal’—char acters in two well-known plays of Ibsen’s. [ A Doll’s House andThe
Wild Duck.] Some time before, I had read a newspaper article on Ibsen bythe same author whose latest work I was criticizing in the dream.313 A. The Work of Condensation
1 [The relation between presentations of words and of things was discussed by
Freud very much later, in the last pages of his paper on the Unconscious (1915 e).]
2 [A dream involving a number of verbal conceits is reported by Freud in Chapter
V (10) of his Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b ).—The examples which
follow are, as will be seen, for the most part untranslatable. See Editor’s Intro-
duction (p. xxi).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 313ii
One of my women patients told me a short dream which ended in a
meaningless verbal compound. She dreamt she was with her husband at
a peasant festivity and said: ‘This will end in a general “Maistollmütz .”’ In
the dream she had a vague feeling that it was some kind of pudding madewith maize—a sort of polenta. Analysis divided the word into ‘ Mais ’
[‘maize’], ‘ toll’ [‘mad’], ‘mannstoll ’ [‘nymphomaniac’—literally ‘mad for
men’] and Olmütz [a town in Moravia]. All these fragments were found
to be remnants of a conversation she had had at table with her relatives.The following words lay behind ‘ Mais’ (in addition to a reference to the
recently opened Jubilee Exhibition
1): ‘Meissen ’ (a Meissen [Dresden]
porcelain ﬁgure representing a bird); ‘ Miss’ (her relatives’ English gov-
erness had just gone to Olmütz ); and ‘mies’ (a Jewish slang term, used jok-
ingly to mean ‘disgusting’). A long chain of thoughts and associations ledoff from each syllable of this verbal hotchpotch.
iii
A young man, whose door-bell had been rung late one night by an ac-
quaintance who wanted to leave a visiting-card on him, had a dream thatnight: A man had been working till late in the evening to put his house-
 telephone in order. After he had gone, it kept on ringing—not continuously,but with detached rings. His servant fetched the man back, and the latter re-marked: ‘It’s a funny thing that even people who are “tutelrein” as a rule arequite unable to deal with a thing like this. ’
It will be seen that the indifferent exciting cause of the dream only
covers one element of it. That episode only obtained any importancefrom the fact that the dreamer put it in the same series as an earlier expe-rience which, though equally indifferent in itself, was given a substitutivemeaning by his imagination. When he was a boy, living with his father,he had upset a glass of water over the ﬂoor while he was half-asleep. Theﬂex of the house-telephone had been soaked through and its continuous314 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [To commemorate the jubilee of the Emperor Francis Joseph, which was cele-
brated in 1898.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 314ringing had disturbed his father’s sleep. Since the continuous ringing cor-
responded to getting wet, the ‘ detached rings ’ were used to represent drops
falling. The word ‘ tutelrein ’ could be analysed in three directions, and led
in that way to three of the subjects represented in the dream-thoughts.
‘Tutel ’ is a legal term for ‘guardianship’ [‘tutelage’]. ‘ Tutel (or possibly
‘Tuttel ’) is also a vulgar term for a woman’s breast. The remaining portion
of the word, ‘ rein’ [‘clean’], combined with the ﬁrst part of ‘Zimmertele-
graph’ [‘house-telephone’], forms ‘ zimmerrein’ [‘house-trained’]—which
is closely connected with making the ﬂoor wet, and, in addition, soundedvery much like the name of a member of the dreamer’s family.
1
iv
In a confused dream of my own of some length, whose central point
seemed to be a sea voyage, it appeared that the next stopping place wascalled ‘ Hearsing ’ and the next after that ‘ Fliess .’ This last word was the315 A. The Work of Condensation
1 In waking life this same kind of analysis and synthesis of syllables—a syllabic
chemistry, in fact—plays a part in a great number of jokes: ‘What is the cheapest
way of obtaining silver? You go down an avenue of silver poplars [ Pappeln, which
means both “poplars” and “babbling”] and call for silence. The babbling thenceases and the silver is released.’ The ﬁrst reader and critic of this book—and hissuccessors are likely to follow his example—protested that ‘the dreamer seems tobe too ingenious and amusing.’ This is quite true so long as it refers only to thedreamer; it would only be an objection if it were to be extended to the dream-interpreter. In waking reality I have little claim to be regarded as a wit. If mydreams seem amusing, that is not on my account, but on account of the peculiarpsychological conditions under which dreams are constructed; and the fact is in-timately connected with the theory of jokes and the comic. Dreams become in-genious and amusing because the direct and easiest pathway to the expression oftheir thoughts is barred: they are forced into being so. The reader can convincehimself that my patients’ dreams seem at least as full of jokes and puns as myown, or even fuller.—[ Added 1909:] Nevertheless this objection led me to com-
pare the technique of jokes with the dream-work; and the results are to be foundin the book which I published on Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious
(1905c ). [In particular in Chapter VI.—Towards the end of this chapter Freud
remarks that dream-jokes are bad jokes, and explains why this should be so. Thesame point is made in Lecture XV of the Introductory Lectures (1916–17.)—The
‘ﬁrst reader’ referred to above was Fliess, and the question is dealt with in a letterto him of September 11, 1899 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 118)].9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 315name of my friend in B[erlin], who has often been the goal of my travels.
‘Hearsing’ was a compound. One part of it was derived from the namesof places on the suburban railway near Vienna, which so often end in‘ing’: Hietzing, Liesing, Mödling (Medelitz, ‘ meae deliciae ,’ was its old
name—that is ‘ meine Freud ?’ [‘my delight’]). The other part was derived
from the English word ‘hearsay.’ This suggested slander and establishedthe dream’s connection with its indifferent instigator of the previous day:a poem in the periodical Fliegende Blätter about a slanderous dwarf called
‘Sagter Hatergesagt’ [‘He-says Says-he’]. If the syllable ‘ing’ were to beadded to the name ‘Fliess’ we should get ‘Vlissingen,’ which was in factthe stopping-place on the sea voyage made by my brother whenever hevisited us from England. But the English name for Vlissingen is ‘Flush-ing,’ which in English means ‘blushing’ and reminded me of the patientsI have treated for ereutophobia, and also of a recent paper on that neuro-sis by Bechterew which had caused me some annoyance.
v
On another occasion I had a dream which consisted of two separate
pieces. The ﬁrst piece was the word ‘Autodidasker,’ which I recalledvividly. The second piece was an exact reproduction of a short and harm-less phantasy which I had produced some days before. This phantasy wasto the effect that when I next saw Professor N. I must say to him: ‘Thepatient about whose condition I consulted you recently is in fact only suf-fering from a neurosis, just as you suspected.’ Thus the neologism ‘Auto-didasker’ must satisfy two conditions: ﬁrstly, it must bear or represent acomposite meaning; and secondly, that meaning must be solidly relatedto the intention I had reproduced from waking life of making amends toProfessor N.
The word ‘Autodidasker’ could easily be analysed into ‘Autor’ [Au-
thor], ‘Autodidakt’ [self-taught] and ‘Lasker,’ with which I also associatedthe name of Lassalle.
1The ﬁrst of these words led to the precipitating316 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Ferdinand Lassalle, founder of the German Social Democratic movement, was
born at Breslau in 1825 and died in 1864. Eduard Lasker (1829–1884), born at
Jarotschin, not far from Breslau, was one of the founders of the National LiberalParty in Germany. Both were of Jewish origin.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 316cause of the dream—this time a signiﬁcant one. I had given my wife sev-
eral volumes by a well-known [Austrian] writer who was a friend of mybrother’s, and who, as I have learnt, was a native of my own birth-place:J. J. David. One evening she had told me of the deep impression that hadbeen made on her by the tragic story in one of David’s books of how aman of talent went to the bad; and our conversation had turned to a dis-cussion of the gifts of which we saw signs in our own children. Under theimpact of what she had been reading, my wife expressed concern about thechildren, and I consoled her with the remark that those were the very dan-gers which could be kept at bay by a good up-bringing. My train ofthought was carried further during the night; I took up my wife’s concernand wove all kinds of other things into it. A remark made by the author tomy brother on the subject of marriage showed my thoughts a by-pathalong which they might come to be represented in the dream. This pathled to Breslau, where a lady with whom we were very friendly had gone tobe married and settle down. The concern I felt over the danger of comingto grief over a woman—for that was the kernel of my dream-thoughts—found an example in Breslau in the cases of Lasker and Lassalle whichmade it possible to give a simultaneous picture of the two ways in whichthis fatal inﬂuence can be exercised.
1‘Cherchez la femme,’ the phrase in
which these thoughts could be summarized, led me, taken in anothersense, to my still unmarried brother, whose name is Alexander. I now per-ceived that ‘Alex,’ the shortened form of the name by which we call him,has almost the same sound as an anagram of ‘Lasker,’ and that this factormust have had a share in leading my thoughts along the by-path by wayof Breslau.
The play which I was making here upon names and syllables had a still
further sense, however. It expressed a wish that my brother might have ahappy domestic life, and it did so in this way. In Zola’s novel of an artist’slife, L’oeuvre , the subject of which must have been close to my dream-
thoughts, its author, as is well known, introduced himself and his own do-mestic happiness as an episode. He appears under the name of ‘Sandoz.’The transformation was probably arrived at as follows. If ‘Zola’ is writtenbackwards (the sort of thing children are so fond of doing), we arrive at317 A. The Work of Condensation
1 Lasker died of tabes, that is, as a result of an infection (syphilis) contracted from
a woman; Lassalle, as everyone knows, fell in a duel on account of a woman.
[George Meredith’s Tragic Comedians is based on his story.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 317‘Aloz.’ No doubt this seemed too undisguised. He therefore replaced ‘Al,’
which is the ﬁrst syllable of ‘Alexander’ by ‘Sand,’ which is the third sylla-ble of the same name; and in this way ‘Sandoz’ came into being. My own‘Autodidasker’ arose in much the same fashion.
I must now explain how my phantasy of telling Professor N. that the
patient we had both examined was only suffering from a neurosis madeits way into the dream. Shortly before the end of my working year, I began the treatment of a new patient who quite bafﬂed my powers of di-agnosis. The presence of a grave organic disease—perhaps some degener-ation of the spinal cord—strongly suggested itself but could not beestablished. It would have been tempting to diagnose a neurosis (whichwould have solved every difﬁculty), if only the patient had not repudiatedwith so much energy the sexual history without which I refuse to recog-nize the presence of a neurosis. In my embarrassment I sought help fromthe physician whom I, like many other people, respect more than any asa man and before whose authority I am readiest to bow. He listened tomy doubts, told me they were justiﬁed, and then gave his opinion: ‘Keepthe man under observation; it must be a neurosis.’ Since I knew he didnot share my views on the aetiology of the neuroses, I did not producemy counter-argument, but I made no concealment of my scepticism. Afew days later I informed the patient that I could do nothing for him andrecommended him to seek other advice. Whereupon, to my intense as-tonishment, he started apologizing for having lied to me. He had beentoo much ashamed of himself, he said, and went on to reveal precisely thepiece of sexual aetiology which I had been expecting and without whichI had been unable to accept his illness as a neurosis. I was relieved but atthe same time humiliated. I had to admit that my consultant, not beingled astray by considering the anamnesis, had seen more clearly than I had.And I proposed to tell him as much when I next met him—to tell himthat he had been right and I wrong.
This was precisely what I did in the dream. But what sort of a wish-
fulﬁlment can there have been in confessing that I was wrong? To bewrong was, however, just what I didwish. I wanted to be wrong in my
fears, or, more precisely, I wanted my wife, whose fears I had adopted inthe dream-thoughts, to be wrong. The subject round which the questionof right or wrong revolved in the dream was not far removed from whatthe dream-thoughts were really concerned with. There was the same al-ternative between organic and functional damage caused by a woman, or,318 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 318more properly, by sexuality: tabetic paralysis or neurosis? (The manner of
Lassalle’s death could be loosely classed in the latter category.)
In this closely knit and, when it was carefully interpreted, very trans-
parent dream, Professor N. played a part not only on account of this anal-ogy and of my wish to be wrong, and on account of his incidentalconnections with Breslau and with the family of our friend who had set-tled there after her marriage—but also on account of the followingepisode which occurred at the end of our consultation. When he hadgiven his opinion and so concluded our medical discussion, he turned tomore personal subjects: ‘How many children have you got now?’—‘Six.’—He made a gesture of admiration and concern.—‘Girls orboys?’—‘Three and three: they are my pride and my treasure.’—‘Well,now, be on your guard! Girls are safe enough, but bringing up boys leadsto difﬁculties later on.’—I protested that mine had been very well be-haved so far. Evidently this second diagnosis, on the future of my boys,pleased me no more than the earlier one, according to which my patientwas suffering from a neurosis. Thus these two impressions were bound uptogether by their contiguity, by the fact of their having been experiencedboth at once; and in taking the story of the neurosis into my dream, I wassubstituting it for the conversation about up-bringing, which had moreconnection with the dream-thoughts, since it touched so closely upon theworries later expressed by my wife. So even my fear that N. might beright in what he said about the difﬁculty of bringing up boys had founda place in the dream, for it lay concealed behind the representation of mywish that I myself might be wrong in harbouring such fears. The samephantasy served unaltered to represent both of the opposing alternatives.
vi
‘Early this morning,1between dreaming and waking, I experienced a
very nice example of verbal condensation. In the course of a mass of dream-fragments that I could scarcely remember, I was brought up short, as itwere, by a word which I saw before me as though it were half written andhalf printed. The word was “ erzeﬁlisch ,” and it formed part of a sentence319 A. The Work of Condensation
1 Quoted from Marcinowski [1911.] [This paragraph was added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 319which slipped into my conscious memory apart from any context and in
complete isolation: “That has an erzeﬁlisch inﬂuence on the sexual emo-
tions.” I knew at once that the word ought really to have been “ erzieherisch ”
[“educational”]. And I was in doubt for some time whether the second “ e”
in “erzeﬁlisch ” should not have been an “ i.”1In that connection the word
“syphilis” occurred to me and, starting to analyse the dream while I was stillhalf asleep, I racked my brains in an effort to make out how that wordcould have got into my dream, since I had nothing to do with the diseaseeither personally or professionally. I then thought of “erzehlerisch” [anothernonsense word], and this explained the “e” of the second syllable of “ erze-
ﬁlisch ” by reminding me that the evening before I had been asked by our
governess [ Erzieherin ] to say something to her on the problem of prostitu-
tion, and had given her Hesse’s book on prostitution in order to inﬂuenceher emotional life—for this had not developed quite normally; after whichI had talked [erzählt] a lot to her on the problem. I then saw all at once thatthe word “syphilis” was not to be taken literally, but stood for “poison”—of course in relation to sexual life. When translated, therefore, the sentencein the dream ran quite logically: “My talk [Erzählung] was intended to have
an educational [ erzieherisch ] inﬂuence on the emotional life of our gov-
erness [ Erzieherin ]; but I fear it may at the same time have had a poisonous
effect.” “Erzeﬁlisch ” was compounded from “ erzäh -” and “erzieh-.”’
The verbal malformations in dreams greatly resemble those which are
familiar in paranoia but which are also present in hysteria and obsessions.The linguistic tricks performed by children,
2who sometimes actually
treat words as though they were objects and moreover invent new lan-guages and artiﬁcial syntactic forms, are the common source of thesethings in dreams and psychoneuroses alike.
The analysis of the nonsensical verbal forms that occur in dreams
3is
particularly well calculated to exhibit the dream-work’s achievements in320 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This ingenious example of condensation turns upon the pronunciation of the
second syllable—the stressed syllable—of the nonsense word. If it is ‘ ze,’ it is
pronounced roughly like the English ‘tsay,’ thus resembling the second syllable
of ‘erzählen ’ and of the invented ‘ erzehlerisch .’ If it is ‘zi,’ it is pronounced
roughly like the English ‘tsee,’ thus resembling the second syllable of‘erzieherisch ,’ as well as (less closely) the ﬁrst syllable of ‘syphilis.’]
2 See Chapter IV of Freud’s book on jokes (1905 c).]
3 [This paragraph was added in 1916.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 320the way of condensation. The reader should not conclude from the
paucity of the instances which I have given that material of this kind israre or observed at all exceptionally. On the contrary, it is very common.But as a result of the fact that dream-interpretation is dependent uponpsycho-analytic treatment, only a very small number of instances are ob-served and recorded and the analyses of such instances are as a rule onlyintelligible to experts in the pathology of the neuroses. Thus a dream ofthis kind was reported by Dr. von Karpinska (1914) containing the non-sensical verbal form: ‘ Svingnum elvi.’ It is also worth mentioning those
cases in which a word appears in a dream which is not in itself meaning-less but which has lost its proper meaning and combines a number ofother meanings to which it is related in just the same way as a ‘meaning-less’ word would be. This is what occurred, for instance, in the ten-year-old boy’s dream of a ‘category’ which was recorded by Tausk (1913).‘Category’ in that case meant ‘female genitals’ and to ‘categorate’ meantthe same as ‘to micturate.’
Where spoken sentences occur in dreams and are expressly distin-
guished as such from thoughts, it is an invariable rule that the words spo-ken in the dream are derived from spoken words remembered in thedream-material. The text of the speech is either retained unaltered or ex-pressed with some slight displacement. A speech in a dream is often puttogether from various recollected speeches, the text remaining the samebut being given, if possible, several meanings, or one different from theoriginal one. A spoken remark in a dream is not infrequently no more thanan allusion to an occasion on which the remark in question was made.
1321 A. The Work of Condensation
1 [Footnote added 1909:] Not long ago I found a single exception to this rule in
the case of a young man who suffered from obsessions while retaining intact his
highly developed intellectual powers. The spoken words which occurred in hisdreams were not derived from remarks which he had heard or made himself.They contained the undistorted text of his obsessional thoughts, which in hiswaking life only reached his consciousness in a modiﬁed form. [This young manwas the subject of Freud’s case history of an obsessional neurotic (the ‘RatMan’); a reference to this point will be found there (Freud, 1909 d) near the be-
ginning of Section 11(A).—The question of spoken words in dreams is dealtwith much more fully below on pp. 427 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 321(B)
THE WORK OF DISPLACEMENT
In making our collection of instances of condensation in dreams, the ex-
istence of another relation, probably of no less importance, had already be-
come evident. It could be seen that the elements which stand out as theprincipal components of the manifest content of the dream are far fromplaying the same part in the dream-thoughts. And, as a corollary, the con-verse of this assertion can be afﬁrmed: what is clearly the essence of thedream-thoughts need not be represented in the dream at all. The dream is,as it were, differently centred from the dream-thoughts—its content hasdifferent elements as its central point. Thus in the dream of the botanicalmonograph [pp. 193 ff.], for instance, the central point of the dream- content was obviously the element ‘botanical’; whereas the dream-thoughtswere concerned with the complications and conﬂicts arising between col-leagues from their professional obligations, and further with the charge thatI was in the habit of sacriﬁcing too much for the sake of my hobbies. Theelement ‘botanical’ had no place whatever in this core of the dream-thoughts, unless it was loosely connected with it by an  antithesis—the factthat botany never had a place among my favourite studies. In my patient’sSappho dream [pp. 302 ff.] the central position was occupied by climbing
up and down and being up above and down below; the dream-thoughts,however, dealt with the dangers of sexual relations with people of an infe-rior social class. So that only a single element of the dream-thoughts seemsto have found its way into the dream- content, though that element was ex-panded to a disproportionate extent. Similarly, in the dream of the may-beetles [pp. 307 ff.], the topic of which was the relations of sexuality tocruelty, it is true that the factor of cruelty emerged in the dream-content;but it did so in another connection and without any mention of sexuality,that is to say, divorced from its context and consequently transformed intosomething extraneous. Once again, in my dream about my uncle [pp. 162ff.], the fair beard which formed its centre-point seems to have had no con-nection in its meaning with my ambitious wishes which, as we saw, werethe core of the dream-thoughts. Dreams such as these give a justiﬁable im-pression of ‘displacement.’ In complete contrast to these examples, we can322 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 322see that in the dream of Irma’s injection [pp. 131 ff.] the different elements
were able to retain, during the process of constructing the dream, the ap-proximate place which they occupied in the dream-thoughts. This furtherrelation between the dream-thoughts and the dream-content, wholly vari-able as it is in its sense or direction, is calculated at ﬁrst to create astonish-ment. If we are considering a psychical process in normal life and ﬁnd thatone out of its several component ideas has been picked out and has ac-quired a special degree of vividness in consciousness, we usually regard thiseffect as evidence that a specially high amount of psychical value—someparticular degree of interest—attaches to this predominant idea. But wenow discover that, in the case of the different elements of the dream-thoughts, a value of this kind does not persist or is disregarded in the pro-cess of dream-formation. There is never any doubt as to which of theelements of the dream-thoughts have the highest psychical value; we learnthat by direct judgement. In the course of the formation of a dream theseessential elements, charged, as they are, with intense interest, may be treatedas though they were of small value, and their place may be taken in thedream by other elements, of whose small value in the dream-thoughts therecan be no question. At ﬁrst sight it looks as though no attention whateveris paid to the psychical intensity
1of the various ideas in making the choice
among them for the dream, and as though the only thing considered is thegreater or less degree of multiplicity of their determination. What appearsin dreams, we might suppose, is not what is important in the dream-
thoughts but what occurs in them several times over. But this hypothesisdoes not greatly assist our understanding of dream-formation, since fromthe nature of things it seems clear that the two factors of multiple determi-nation and inherent psychical value must necessarily operate in the samesense. The ideas which are most important among the dream-thoughts willalmost certainly be those which occur most often in them, since the differ-ent dream-thoughts will, as it were, radiate out from them. Nevertheless adream can reject elements which are thus both highly stressed in themselvesand reinforced from many directions, and can select for its content otherelements which possess only the second of these attributes.
In order to solve this difﬁculty we shall make use of another impres-
sion derived from our enquiry [in the previous section] into the over -determination of the dream-content. Perhaps some of those who have read323 B. The Work of Displacement
1 Psychical intensity or value or the degree of interest of an idea is of course to be
distinguished from sensory intensity or the intensity of the image presented.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 323that enquiry may already have formed an independent conclusion that the
overdetermination of the elements of dreams is no very important discov-ery, since it is a self-evident one. For in analysis we start out from thedream-elements and note down all the associations which lead off fromthem; so that there is nothing surprising in the fact that in the thought-material arrived at in this way we come across these same elements withpeculiar frequency. I cannot accept this objection; but I will myself putinto words something that sounds not unlike it. Among the thoughts thatanalysis brings to light are many which are relatively remote from the ker-nel of the dream and which look like artiﬁcial interpolations made forsome particular purpose. That purpose is easy to divine. It is precisely theythat constitute a connection, often a forced and far-fetched one, betweenthe dream-content and the dream-thoughts; and if these  elements wereweeded out of the analysis the result would often be that the componentparts of the dream-content would be left not only without overdetermina-tion but without any satisfactory determination at all. We shall be led toconclude that the multiple determination which decides what shall be in-cluded in a dream is not always a primary factor in dream-constructionbut is often the secondary product of a psychical force which is still un-known to us. Nevertheless multiple determination must be of importancein choosing what particular elements shall enter a dream, since we can seethat a considerable expenditure of effort is used to bring it about in caseswhere it does not arise from the dream-material unassisted.
It thus seems plausible to suppose that in the dream-work a psychical
force is operating which on the one hand strips the elements which have ahigh psychical value of their intensity, and on the other hand, by means ofover-determination , creates from elements of low psychical value new values,
which afterwards ﬁnd their way into the dream-content. If that is so, atransference and displacement of psychical intensities occurs in the process of
dream-formation, and it is as a result of these that the difference betweenthe text of the dream-content and that of the dream-thoughts comesabout. The process which we are here presuming is nothing less than theessential portion of the dream-work; and it deserves to be described as‘dream-displacement.’ Dream-displacement and dream- condensation arethe two governing factors to whose activity we may in essence ascribe theform assumed by dreams.
Nor do I think we shall have any difﬁculty in recognizing the psychical
force which manifests itself in the facts of dream-displacement. The con-sequence of the displacement is that the dream-content no longer resem-324 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 324bles the core of the dream-thoughts and that the dream gives no more than
a distortion of the dream-wish which exists in the unconscious. But we arealready familiar with dream-distortion. We traced it back to the censorshipwhich is exercised by one psychical agency in the mind over another. [Seepp. 167 ff.] Dream-displacement is one of the chief methods by whichthat distortion is achieved. Is fecit cui profuit .
1We may assume, then, that
dream-displacement comes about through the inﬂuence of the same cen-sorship—that is, the censorship of endopsychic defence.
2325 B. The Work of Displacement
1 [The old legal tag: ‘He did the deed who gained by it.’]
2 [Footnote added 1909:] Since I may say that the kernel of my theory of dreams
lies in my derivation of dream-distortion from the censorship, I will here insert
the last part of a story from Phantasien eines Realisten [Phantasies of a Realist ] by
‘Lynkeus’ (Vienna, 2nd edition, 1900 [1st edition, 1899]), in which I have foundthis principal feature of my theory once more expounded. [See above, Postscript,1909, to Chapter I, pp. 120 f.; also Freud, 1923 fand 1932c. ] The title of the
story is ‘T räumen wie Wachen,’ [‘Dreaming Like Waking’]:
‘About a man who has the remarkable attribute of never dreaming nonsense. . . .‘“This splendid gift of yours, for dreaming as though you were waking, is a
consequence of your virtues, of your kindness, your sense of justice, and yourlove of truth; it is the moral serenity of your nature which makes me understandall about you.”
‘“But when I think the matter over properly,” replied the other, “I almost be-
lieve that everyone is made like me, and that no one at all ever dreams nonsense.Any dream which one can remember clearly enough to describe it afterwards—any dream, that is to say, which is not a fever-dream—must always make sense,
and it cannot possibly be otherwise. For things that were mutually contradictorycould not group themselves into a single whole. The fact that time and space areoften thrown into confusion does not affect the true content of the dream, sinceno doubt neither of them are of signiﬁcance for its real essence. We often do thesame thing in waking life. Only think of fairy tales and of the many daring prod-ucts of the imagination, which are full of meaning and of which only a manwithout intelligence could say: ‘This is nonsense, for it’s impossible.’”
‘“If only one always knew how to interpret dreams in the right way, as you
have just done with mine!” said his friend.
‘“That is certainly no easy task; but with a little attention on the part of the
dreamer himself it should no doubt always succeed.—You ask why it is that forthe most part it does notsucceed? In you other people there seems always to be
something that lies concealed in your dreams, something unchaste in a specialand higher sense, a certain secret quality in your being which it is hard to follow.And that is why your dreams so often seem to be without meaning or even to benonsense. But in the deepest sense this is not in the least so; indeed, it cannot beso at all—for it is always the same man, whether he is awake or dreaming.”’9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 325The question of the interplay of these factors—of displacement, con-
densation and overdetermination—in the construction of dreams, and
the question which is a dominant factor and which a subordinate one—all of this we shall leave aside for later investigation. [See e.g. pp. 415 ff.]But we can state provisionally a second condition which must be satisﬁedby those elements of the dream-thoughts which make their way into thedream: they must escape the censorship imposed by resistance .
1And hence-
forward in interpreting dreams we shall take dream-displacement into ac-count as an undeniable fact.
(C)
THE MEANS OF REPRESENTATION IN DREAMS
In the process of transforming the latent thoughts into the manifest
content of a dream we have found two factors at work: dream-condensa-tion and dream-displacement. As we continue our investigation we shall,in addition to these, come across two further determinants which exercisean undoubted inﬂuence on the choice of the material which is to ﬁnd ac-cess to the dream.
But ﬁrst, even at the risk of appearing to bring our progress to a halt, I
should like to take a preliminary glance at the processes involved in carry-ing out the interpretation of a dream. I cannot disguise from myself thatthe easiest way of making those processes clear and of defending theirtrustworthiness against criticism would be to take some particular dreamas a sample, go through its interpretation (just as I have done with thedream of Irma’s injection in my second chapter), and then collect thedream-thoughts which I have discovered and go on to reconstruct fromthem the process by which the dream was formed—in other words, tocomplete a dream-analysis by a dream-synthesis. I have in fact carried outthat task for my own instruction on several specimens; but I cannot repro-duce them here, since I am forbidden to do so for reasons connected withthe nature of the psychical material involved—reasons which are of manykinds and which will be accepted as valid by any reasonable person. Such326 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [The ﬁrst condition being that they must be overdetermined. (See pp. 324 f.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 326considerations interfered less in the analysis of dreams, since an analysis
could be incomplete and nevertheless retain its value, even though it pen-
etrated only a small way into the texture of the dream. But in the case ofthe synthesis of a dream I do not see how it can be convincing unless it iscomplete. I could only give a complete synthesis of dreams dreamt by
people unknown to the reading public. Since, however, this condition isfulﬁlled only by my patients, who are neurotics, I must postpone this partof my exposition of the subject till I am able—in another volume—tocarry the psychological elucidation of neuroses to a point at which it canmake contact with our present topic.
1
My attempts at building up dreams by synthesis from the dream-
thoughts have taught me that the material which emerges in the course ofinterpretation is not all of the same value. One part of it is made up of theessential dream-thoughts—those, that is, which completely replace thedream, and which, if there were no censorship of dreams, would be sufﬁ-cient in themselves to replace it. The other part of the material is usually tobe regarded as of less importance. Nor is it possible to support the view thatall the thoughts of this second kind had a share in the formation of thedream. (See pp. 298 and 535.) On the contrary, there may be associationsamong them which relate to events that occurred afterthe dream, between
the times of dreaming and interpreting. This part of the material includesall the connecting paths that led from the manifest dream- content to thelatent dream-thoughts, as well as the intermediate and linking associationsby means of which, in the course of the process of interpretation, we cameto discover these connecting paths.
2327 C. The Means of Representation
1 [Footnote added 1909:] Since writing the above words, I have published a com-
plete analysis and synthesis of two dreams in my ‘Fragment of the Analysis of a
Case of Hysteria’ [Freud, 1905 e(Sections II and III). See also the synthesis of
the ‘Wolf Man’s’ dream in Section IV of Freud (1918 b).—Added 1914:] Otto
Rank’s analysis, ‘Ein T raum, der sich selbst deutet’ [‘A Dream which InterpretsItself,’ 1910], deserves mention as the most complete interpretation that hasbeen published of a dream of considerable length.
2 [The last four sentences (beginning with ‘the other part of the material’) date in
their present form from 1919. In editions earlier than that, this passage ran asfollows: ‘The other part of the material may be brought together under the term“collaterals.” As a whole, they constitute the paths over which the true wish,which arises from the dream-thoughts, passes before becoming the dream-wish.The ﬁrst set of these “collaterals” consist in derivatives from the dream-thoughtsproper; they are, schematically regarded, displacements from what is essential to9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 327We are here interested only in the essential dream-thoughts. These
usually emerge as a complex of thoughts and memories of the most intri-
cate possible structure, with all the attributes of the trains of thought fa-miliar to us in waking life. They are not infrequently trains of thoughtstarting out from more than one centre, though having points of contact.Each train of thought is almost invariably accompanied by its contradic-tory counterpart, linked with it by antithetical association.
The different portions of this complicated structure stand, of course, in
the most manifold logical relations to one another. They can representforeground and background, digressions and illustrations, conditions,chains of evidence and counter-arguments. When the whole mass of thesedream-thoughts is brought under the pressure of the dream-work, and itselements are turned about, broken into fragments and jammed together—almost like pack-ice—the question arises of what happens to the logicalconnections which have hitherto formed its framework. What representa-tion do dreams provide for ‘if,’ ‘because,’ ‘just as,’ ‘although,’ ‘either—or,’and all the other conjunctions without which we cannot understand sen-tences or speeches?
In the ﬁrst resort our answer must be that dreams have no means at
their disposal for representing these logical relations between the dream-thoughts. For the most part dreams disregard all these conjunctions, andit is only the substantive content of the dream-thoughts that they take overand manipulate.
1The restoration of the connections which the dream-
work has destroyed is a task which has to be performed by the interpreta-tive process.
The incapacity of dreams to express these things must lie in the nature
of the psychical material out of which dreams are made. The plastic artsof painting and sculpture labour, indeed, under a similar limitation as328 VI. The Dream-Work
what is inessential. A second set of them comprise the thoughts that connect
these inessential elements (which have become important owing to displace-ment) with one another, and extend from them to the dream-content. Finally, athird set consist in the associations and trains of thought by means of which thework of interpretation leads us from the dream-content to the second group ofcollaterals. It need not be supposed that the whole of this third set were neces-sarily also concerned in the formation of the dream.’ With reference to this pas-sage Freud remarks in Ges. Schr. , ‡ (1925), 55 that he has dropped the term
‘collaterals.’ In fact, however, the term has survived below on p. 535.]
1 [A qualiﬁcation of this statement will be found below, p. 458 n.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 328compared with poetry, which can make use of speech; and here once again
the reason for their incapacity lies in the nature of the material which thesetwo forms of art manipulate in their effort to express something. Beforepainting became acquainted with the laws of expression by which it is gov-erned, it made attempts to get over this handicap. In ancient paintingssmall labels were hung from the mouths of the persons represented, con-taining in written characters the speeches which the artist despaired of rep-resenting pictorially.
At this point an objection may perhaps be raised in dispute of the idea
that dreams are unable to represent logical relations. For there are dreamsin which the most complicated intellectual operations take place, state-ments are contradicted or conﬁrmed, ridiculed or compared, just as theyare in waking thought. But here again appearances are deceitful. If we gointo the interpretation of dreams such as these, we ﬁnd that the whole ofthis is part of the material of the dream-thoughts and is not a representation
of intellectual work performed during the dream itself . What is reproduced
by the ostensible thinking in the dream is the subject-matter of the dream-
thoughts and not the mutual relations between them , the assertion of
which constitutes thinking. I shall bring forward some instances of this.[See pp. 449 ff.] But the easiest point to establish in this connection isthat all spoken sentences which occur in dreams and are speciﬁcally de-scribed as such are unmodiﬁed or slightly modiﬁed reproductions ofspeeches which are also to be found among the recollections in the mate-rial of the dream-thoughts. A speech of this kind is often no more thanan allusion to some event included among the dream-thoughts, and themeaning of the dream may be a totally different one. [See pp. 427 ff.]
Nevertheless, I will not deny that critical thought-activity which is not
a mere repetition of material in the dream-thoughts doeshave a share in
the formation of dreams. I shall have to elucidate the part played by thisfactor at the end of the present discussion. It will then become apparentthat this thought-activity is not produced by the dream-thoughts but bythe dream itself after it has already, in a certain sense, been completed.[See the last Section of this Chapter (p. 493).]
Provisionally, then, it may be said that the logical relations between the
dream-thoughts are not given any separate representation in dreams. Forinstance, if a contradiction occurs in a dream, it is either a contradictionof the dream itself or a contradiction derived from the subject-matter ofone of the dream-thoughts. A contradiction in a dream can only corre-spond in an exceedingly indirect manner to a contradiction between the329 C. The Means of Representation9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 329dream-thoughts. But just as the art of painting eventually found a way of
expressing, by means other than the ﬂoating labels, at least the intention of
the words of the personages represented—affection, threats, warnings, andso on—so too there is a possible means by which dreams can take accountof some of the logical relations between their dream-thoughts, by makingan appropriate modiﬁcation in the method of representation characteristicof dreams. Experience shows that different dreams vary greatly in this re-spect. While some dreams completely disregard the logical sequence oftheir material, others attempt to give as full an indication of it as possible.In doing so dreams depart sometimes more and sometimes less widelyfrom the text that is at their disposal for manipulation. Incidentally dreamsvary similarly in their treatment of the chronological sequence of the
dream-thoughts, if such a sequence has been established in the uncon-scious (as, for instance, in the dream of Irma’s injection. [Pp. 131 ff.]).
What means does the dream-work possess for indicating these relations
in the dream-thoughts which it is so hard to represent? I will attempt toenumerate them one by one.
In the ﬁrst place, dreams take into account in a general way the con-
nection which undeniably exists between all the portions of the dream-thoughts by combining the whole material into a single situation or event.They reproduce logical connection by simultaneity in time. Here they are
acting like the painter who, in a picture of the School of Athens or of Par-nassus, represents in one group all the philosophers or all the poets. It istrue that they were never in fact assembled in a single hall or on a singlemountain-top; but they certainly form a group in the conceptual sense.
Dreams carry this method of reproduction down to details. Whenever
they show us two elements close together, this guarantees that there issome specially intimate connection between what correspond to themamong the dream-thoughts. In the same way, in our system of writing, ‘ ab’
means that the two letters are to be pronounced in a single syllable. If agap is left between the ‘ a’ and the ‘b ,’ it means that the ‘a ’ is the last letter
of one word and the ‘b ’ is the ﬁrst of the next one.
1So, too, collocations
in dreams do not consist of any chance, disconnected portions of the330 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This simile is a favourite one of Freud’s. He uses it above on p. 265 and again
in the middle of Section I of the case history of Dora (1905 c). It is possibly de-
rived from a lyric of Goethe’s (‘Schwer in Waides Busch’) in which the same im-
age occurs.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 330dream-material, but of portions which are fairly closely connected in the
dream-thoughts as well.
For representing causal relations dreams have two procedures which are
in essence the same. Suppose the dream-thoughts run like this: ‘Since thiswas so and so, such and such was bound to happen.’ Then the commonermethod of representation would be to introduce the dependent clause as anintroductory dream and to add the principal clause as the main dream. If Ihave interpreted aright, the temporal sequence may be reversed. But themore extensive part of the dream always corresponds to the principal clause.
One of my women patients once produced an excellent instance of this
way of representing causality in a dream which I shall later record fully. [Seepp. 361 ff.; also discussed on pp. 335 and 340.] It consisted of a short pre -
lude and a very diffuse piece of dream which was centred to a marked de-gree on a single theme and might be entitled ‘The Language of Flowers.’
The introductory dream was as follows: She went into the kitchen,
where her two maids were, and found fault with them for not having got her‘bite of food’ ready. At the same time she saw a very large quantity of commonkitchen crockery standing upside down in the kitchen to drain; it was piledup in heaps. The two maids went to fetch some water and had to step into akind of river which came right up to the house or into the yard. The main
dream then followed, beginning thus: She was descending from a height
over some strangely constructed palisades, and felt glad that her dress was notcaught in them . . . etc.
The introductory dream related to the dreamer’s parents’ home. No
doubt she had often heard her mother using the words that occurred inthe dream. The heaps of common crockery were derived from a modesthardware shop which was located in the same building. The other part ofthe dream contained a reference to her father, who used always to run afterthe maids and who eventually contracted a fatal illness during a ﬂood.(The house stood near a river-bank.) Thus the thought concealed behindthe introductory dream ran as follows: ‘Because I was born in this house,in such mean and depressing circumstances . . .’ The main dream took upthe same thought and presented it in a form modiﬁed by wish-fulﬁlment:‘I am of high descent.’ Thus the actual underlying thought was: ‘BecauseI am of such low descent, the course of my life has been so and so.’
The division of a dream into two unequal parts does not invariably, so
far as I can see, signify that there is a causal relation between the thoughtsbehind the two parts. It often seems as though the same material were331 C. The Means of Representation9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 331 being represented in the two dreams from different points of view. (This
is certainly the case where a series of dreams during one night end in anemission or orgasm—a series in which the somatic need ﬁnds its way toprogressively clearer expression.)
1Or the two dreams may have sprung
from separate centres in the dream-material, and their content may over-lap, so that what is the centre in one dream is present as a mere hint inthe other, and vice versa . But in a certain number of dreams a division
into a shorter preliminary dream and a longer sequel does in fact signifythat there is a causal relation between the two pieces.
The other method of representing a causal relation is adapted to less
extensive material and consists in one image in the dream, whether of aperson or thing, being transformed into another. The existence of a causalrelation is only to be taken seriously if the transformation actually occursbefore our eyes and not if we merely notice that one thing has appearedin the place of another.
I have said that the two methods of representing a causal relation were
in essence the same. In both cases causation is represented by temporal se-quence: in one instance by a sequence of dreams and in the other by thedirect transformation of one image into another. In the great majority ofcases, it must be confessed, the causal relation is not represented at all butis lost in the confusion of elements which inevitably occurs in the processof dreaming.
The alternative ‘either—or’ cannot be expressed in dreams in any way
whatever. Both of the alternatives are usually inserted in the text of thedream as though they were equally valid. The dream of Irma’s injectioncontains a classic instance of this. Its latent thoughts clearly ran [see p. 143]:‘I am not responsible for the persistence of Irma’s pains; the responsibilitylies either in her recalcitrance to accepting my solution, orin the un-
favourable sexual conditions under which she lives and which I cannot al-ter, or in the fact that her pains are not hysterical at all but of an organicnature.’ The dream, on the other hand, fulﬁlled allof these possibilities
(which were almost mutually exclusive), and did not hesitate to add afourth solution, based on the dream-wish. After interpreting the dream, Iproceeded to insert the ‘either—or’ into the context of the dream-thoughts.332 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This sentence was added in 1914. The point is further mentioned on p. 350
and discussed at greater length on pp. 412–14. The whole subject of dreams oc-
curring on the same night is dealt with on pp. 348 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 332If, however, in reproducing a dream, its narrator feels inclined to make
use of an ‘either—or’—e.g. ‘it was either a garden or a sitting-room’—
what was present in the dream-thoughts was not an alternative but an‘and,’ a simple addition. An ‘either—or’ is mostly used to describe adream-element that has a quality of vagueness—which, however, is capa-ble of being resolved. In such cases the rule for interpretation is: treat thetwo apparent alternatives as of equal validity and link them together withan ‘and.’
For instance, on one occasion a friend of mine was stopping in Italy
and I had been without his address for a considerable time. I then had adream of receiving a telegram containing this address. I saw it printed inblue on the telegraph form. The ﬁrst word was vague:
‘Via,’ perhaps
or ‘Villa’ ; the second was clear: ‘Secerno .’
or possibly even (‘ Casa’)
The second word sounded like some Italian name and reminded me of
discussions I had had with my friend on the subject of etymology. It alsoexpressed my anger with him for having kept his address secret from me for
so long. On the other hand, each of the three alternatives for the ﬁrst wordturned out on analysis to be an independent and equally valid  starting-point for a chain of thoughts.
1 
During the night before my father’s funeral I had a dream of a printed
notice, placard or poster—rather like the notices forbidding one to smokein railway waiting-rooms—on which appeared either
‘You are requested to close the eyes’
or, ‘You are requested to close an eye.’
I usually write this in the form:
the
‘You are requested to close eye(s).’
an333 C. The Means of Representation
1 [This dream will be found described in greater detail in Freud’s letter to Fliess
(the friend in question) of April 28, 1897. See Freud, 1950 a, Letter 60.]/H208539780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 333Each of these two versions had a meaning of its own and led in a different
direction when the dream was interpreted. I had chosen the simplest pos-sible ritual for the funeral, for I knew my father’s own views on such cer-emonies. But some other members of the family were not sympathetic tosuch puritanical simplicity and thought we should be disgraced in theeyes of those who attended the funeral. Hence one of the versions: ‘Youare requested to close an eye,’ i.e. to ‘wink at’ or ‘overlook.’ Here it is par-ticularly easy to see the meaning of the vagueness expressed by the‘either—or.’ The dream-work failed to establish a uniﬁed wording for thedream-thoughts which could at the same time be ambiguous, and the twomain lines of thought consequently began to diverge even in the manifestcontent of the dream.
1
In a few instances the difﬁculty of representing an alternative is got
over by dividing the dream into two pieces of equal length.
The way in which dreams treat the category of contraries and contra-
dictories is highly remarkable. It is simply disregarded. ‘No’ seems not toexist so far as dreams are concerned.
2They show a particular preference
for combining contraries into a unity or for representing them as one andthe same thing. Dreams feel themselves at liberty, moreover, to representany element by its wishful contrary; so there is no way of deciding at aﬁrst glance whether any element that admits of a contrary is present inthe dream-thoughts as a positive or as a negative.
3334 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This dream is reported by Freud in a letter to Fliess of November 2, 1896. (See
Freud, 1950a , Letter 50.) It is there stated to have occurred during the night after
the funeral.]
2 [Qualiﬁcations of this assertion occur on pp. 341, 351 f. and 442 f.—In its ﬁrst
wording the dream referred to closing the dead man’s eyes as a ﬁlial duty.]
3 [Footnote added 1911:] I was astonished to learn from a pamphlet by K. Abel,
The Antithetical Meaning of Primal Words (1884) (cf. my review of it, 1910 e)—
and the fact has been conﬁrmed by other philologists—that the most ancient
languages behave exactly like dreams in this respect. In the ﬁrst instance theyhave only a single word to describe the two contraries at the extreme ends of aseries of qualities or activities (e.g. ‘strong-weak,’ ‘old-young,’ ‘far-near,’ ‘bind-sever’); they only form distinct terms for the two contraries by a secondary pro-cess of making small modiﬁcations in the common word. Abel demonstrates thisparticularly from Ancient Egyptian; but he shows that there are distinct tracesof the same course of development in the Semitic and Indo-Germanic languagesas well. [See also p. 477.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 334In one of the dreams recorded just above, the ﬁrst clause of which has
already been interpreted (‘because my descent was such and such’ [see
p. 331]), the dreamer saw herself climbing down over some palisadesholding a blossoming branch in her hand. In connection with this imageshe thought of the angel holding a spray of lilies in pictures of the Annunciation—her own name was Maria—and of girls in white robeswalking in Corpus Christi processions, when the streets are decoratedwith green branches. Thus the blossoming branch in the dream withoutany doubt alluded to sexual innocence. However, the branch was coveredwith redﬂowers, each of which was like a camellia. By the end of her
walk—so the dream went on—the blossoms were already a good dealfaded. There then followed some unmistakable allusions to menstruation.Accordingly, the same branch which was carried like a lily and as thoughby an innocent girl was at the same time an allusion to the Dame aux
camélias who, as we know, usually wore a white camellia, except during
her periods, when she wore a red one. The same blossoming branch (cf.‘des Mädchens Blüten’ [‘the maiden’s blossoms’] in Goethe’s poem ‘DerMüllerin Verrat’) represented both sexual innocence and its contrary. Andthe same dream which expressed her joy at having succeeded in passingthrough life immaculately gave one glimpses at certain points (e.g. in thefading of the blossoms) of the contrary train of ideas—of her having beenguilty of various sins against sexual purity (in her childhood, that is). Inanalysing the dream it was possible clearly to distinguish the two trains ofthought, of which the consoling one seemed the more superﬁcial and theself-reproachful one the deeper-lying—trains of thought which were dia-metrically opposed to each other but whose similar though contrary ele-ments were represented by the same elements in the manifest dream.
1
One and one only of these logical relations is very highly favoured by
the mechanism of dream-formation; namely, the relation of similarity,consonance or approximation—the relation of ‘just as.’ This relation, un-like any other, is capable of being represented in dreams in a variety ofways.
2Parallels or instances of ‘just as’ inherent in the material of the
dream-thoughts constitute the ﬁrst foundations for the construction of a335 C. The Means of Representation
1 [The dream is fully reported on p. 361 below.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] Cf. Aristotle’s remark on the qualiﬁcations of a dream-
interpreter quoted above on p. 122 n.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 3351 [On the subject of composite ﬁgures cf. also pp. 310 ff. The next three sentences
were added in 1911. The ﬁnal sentence of the paragraph was added in 1914.—
‘Identiﬁcation’ in this passage is evidently being used in a sense different fromthat discussed on pp. 173 ff.]dream; and no inconsiderable part of the dream-work consists in creating
fresh parallels where those which are already present cannot ﬁnd their wayinto the dream owing to the censorship imposed by resistance. The rep-resentation of the relation of similarity is assisted by the tendency of thedream-work towards condensation.
Similarity, consonance, the possession of common attributes—all these
are represented in dreams by uniﬁcation, which may either be present al-ready in the material of the dream-thoughts or may be freshly constructed.The ﬁrst of these possibilities may be described as ‘identiﬁcation’ and thesecond as ‘composition.’ Identiﬁcation is employed where persons are con-
cerned; composition where things are the material of the uniﬁcation. Nev-
ertheless composition may also be applied to persons. Localities are oftentreated like persons.
In identiﬁcation, only one of the persons who are linked by a common
element succeeds in being represented in the manifest content of thedream, while the second or remaining persons seem to be suppressed in it.But this single covering ﬁgure appears in the dream in all the relations andsituations which apply either to him or to the ﬁgures which he covers. Incomposition, where this is extended to persons, the dream-image containsfeatures which are peculiar to one or other of the persons concerned butnot common to them; so that the combination of these features leads tothe appearance of a new unity, a composite ﬁgure. The actual process ofcomposition can be carried out in various ways. On the one hand, thedream-ﬁgure may bear the name of one of the persons related to it—inwhich case we simply know directly, in a manner analogous to our wakingknowledge, that this or that person is intended—while its visual featuresmay belong to the other person. Or, on the other hand, the dream-imageitself may be composed of visual features belonging in reality partly to theone person and partly to the other. Or again the second person’s share inthe dream-image may lie, not in its visual features, but in the gestures thatwe attribute to it, the words that we make it speak, or the situation inwhich we place it. In this last case the distinction between identiﬁcationand the construction of a composite ﬁgure begins to lose its sharpness.
1336 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 336But it may also happen that the formation of a composite ﬁgure of this
kind is unsuccessful. If so, the scene in the dream is attributed to oneof
the persons concerned, while the other (and usually the more importantone) appears as an attendant ﬁgure without any other function. Thedreamer may describe the position in such a phrase as: ‘My mother wasthere as well.’ (Stekel.) An element of this kind in the dream-content maybe compared to the ‘determinatives’ used in hieroglyphic script, which arenot meant to be pronounced but serve merely to elucidate other signs.
The common element which justiﬁes, or rather causes, the combina-
tion of the two persons may be represented in the dream or may be omit-ted from it. As a rule the identiﬁcation or construction of a compositeperson takes place for the very purpose of avoiding the representation ofthe common element. Instead of saying: ‘A has hostile feelings towardsme and so has B,’ I make a composite ﬁgure out of A and Bin the dream,
or I imagine Aperforming an act of some other kind which is character-
istic of B . The dream-ﬁgure thus constructed appears in the dream in
some quite new connection, and the circumstance that it represents bothAand Bjustiﬁes me in inserting at the appropriate point in the dream the
element which is common to both of them, namely a hostile attitude to-wards me. It is often possible in this way to achieve quite a remarkableamount of condensation in the content of a dream; I can save myself theneed for giving a direct representation of very complicated circumstancesrelating to one person, if I can ﬁnd another person to whom some ofthese circumstances apply equally. It is easy to see, too, how well thismethod of representation by means of identiﬁcation can serve to evadethe censorship due to resistance, which imposes such severe conditionsupon the dream-work. What the censorship objects to may lie preciselyin certain ideas which, in the material of the dream-thoughts, are at-tached to a particular person; so I proceed to ﬁnd a second person, whois also connected with the objectionable material, but only with part ofit. The contact between the two persons upon this censorable point nowjustiﬁes me in constructing a composite ﬁgure characterized by indiffer-ent features derived from both. This ﬁgure, arrived at by identiﬁcation orcomposition, is then admissible to the dream-content without censorship,and thus, by making use of dream-condensation, I have satisﬁed theclaims of the dream-censorship.
When a common element between two persons is represented in a
dream, it is usually a hint for us to look for another, concealed common el-ement whose representation has been made impossible by the censorship.337 C. The Means of Representation9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 3371 [Footnote added 1925:] Cf. the footnote on pp. 288.A displacement in regard to the common element has been made in order,
as it were, to facilitate its representation. The fact that the composite ﬁgureappears in the dream with an indifferent common element leads us to con-clude that there is another far from indifferent common element present inthe dream-thoughts.
Accordingly, identiﬁcation or the construction of composite ﬁgures
serves various purposes in dreams: ﬁrstly to represent an element com-mon to two persons, secondly to represent a displaced common element,
and thirdly, too, to express a merely wishful common element. Since
wishing that two persons had a common element frequently coincideswith exchanging one for the other, this latter relation is also expressed indreams by means of identiﬁcation. In the dream of Irma’s injection, Iwished to exchange her for another patient: I wished, that is, that theother woman might be my patient just as Irma was. The dream took thiswish into account by showing me a person who was called Irma, but whowas examined in a position in which I had only had occasion to see theother woman [pp. 133 f.]. In the dream about my uncle an exchange ofthis kind became the central point of the dream: I identiﬁed myself withthe Minister by treating and judging my colleagues no better than he did.[P . 215.]
It is my experience, and one to which I have found no exception, that
every dream deals with the dreamer himself. Dreams are completely ego-istical.
1Whenever my own ego does not appear in the content of the
dream, but only some extraneous person, I may safely assume that myown ego lies concealed, by identiﬁcation, behind this other person; I caninsert my ego into the context. On other occasions, when my own egodoesappear in the dream, the situation in which it occurs may teach me
that some other person lies concealed, by identiﬁcation, behind my ego.In that case the dream should warn me to transfer on to myself, when Iam interpreting the dream, the concealed common element attached tothis other person. There are also dreams in which my ego appears alongwith other people who, when the identiﬁcation is resolved, are revealedonce again as my ego. These identiﬁcations should then make it possiblefor me to bring into contact with my ego certain ideas whose acceptancehas been forbidden by the censorship. Thus my ego may be representedin a dream several times over, now directly and now through identiﬁca-338 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 338tion with extraneous persons. By means of a number of such identiﬁca-
tions it becomes possible to condense an extraordinary amount ofthought-material.
1The fact that the dreamer’s own ego appears several
times, or in several forms, in a dream is at bottom no more remarkablethan that the ego should be contained in a conscious thought severaltimes or in different places or connections—e.g. in the sentence ‘when I
think what a healthy child I was.’
2
Identiﬁcations in the case of proper names of localities are resolved
even more easily than in the case of persons, since here there is no inter-ference by the ego, which occupies such a dominating place in dreams. Inone of my dreams about Rome (see pp. 217 f.), the place in which Ifound myself was called Rome, but I was astonished at the quantity ofGerman posters at a street-corner. This latter point was a wish-fulﬁlment,which at once made me think of Prague; and the wish itself may perhapshave dated from a German-nationalist phase which I passed through dur-ing my youth, but have since got over.
3At the time at which I had the
dream there was a prospect of my meeting my friend [Fliess] in Prague;so that the identiﬁcation of Rome and Prague can be explained as a wish-ful common element: I would rather have met my friend in Rome thanin Prague and would have liked to exchange Prague for Rome for the pur-pose of this meeting.
The possibility of creating composite structures stands foremost among
the characteristics which so often lend dreams a fantastic appearance, forit introduces into the content of dreams elements which could never havebeen objects of actual perception.
4The psychical process of constructing
composite images in dreams is evidently the same as when we imagine orportray a centaur or a dragon in waking life. The only difference is thatwhat determines the production of the imaginary ﬁgure in waking life isthe impression which the new structure itself is intended to make; whereas339 C. The Means of Representation
1 When I am in doubt behind which of the ﬁgures appearing in the dream my ego
is to be looked for, I observe the following rule: the person who in the dream
feels an emotion which I myself experience in my sleep is the one who concealsmy ego.
2 [This sentence was added in 1925. The point is dealt with further in Freud,
1923c , Section X.]
3 [Cf. the ‘Revolutionary’ dream, pp. 231 f. and 233 f.]
4 [Some amusing instances are given at the end of Section IV of Freud’s short es-
say on dreams (1901a); Standard Ed., 5, 651.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 339the formation of the composite structure in a dream is determined by a
factor extraneous to its actual shape—namely the common element in thedream-thoughts. Composite structures in dreams can be formed in a greatvariety of ways. The most naïve of these procedures merely represents theattributes of one thing to the accompaniment of a knowledge that theyalso belong to something else. A more painstaking technique combines thefeatures of both objects into a new image and in so doing makes clever useof any similarities that the two objects may happen to possess in reality.The new structure may seem entirely absurd or may strike us as an imagi-native success, according to the material and to the ingenuity with whichit is put together. If the objects which are to be condensed into a singleunity are much too incongruous, the dream-work is often content withcreating a composite structure with a comparatively distinct nucleus, ac-companied by a number of less distinct features. In that case the processof uniﬁcation into a single image may be said to have failed. The two rep-resentations are superimposed and produce something in the nature of acontest between the two visual images. One might arrive at similar repre-sentations in a drawing, if one tried to illustrate the way in which a generalconcept is formed from a number of individual perceptual images.
Dreams are, of course, a mass of these composite structures. I have
given some examples of them in dreams that I have already analysed; andI will now add a few more. In the dream reported below on pp. 361 ff.[also above, p. 335], which describes the course of the patient’s life ‘in thelanguage of ﬂowers,’ the dream-ego held a blossoming branch in her handwhich, as we have seen, stood both for innocence and for sexual sinfulness.The branch, owing to the way in which the blossoms were placed on it,also reminded the dreamer of cherry-blossom; the blossoms themselves, re-garded individually, were camellias , and moreover the general impression
was of an exotic growth. The common factor among the elements of this
composite structure was shown by the dream-thoughts. The blossomingbranch was composed of allusions to gifts made to her in order to win, orattempt to win, her favour. Thus she had been given cherries in her child-
hood and, later in life, a camellia -plant; while ‘ exotic’ was an allusion to a
much-travelled naturalist who had tried to win her favour with a ﬂower-drawing.—Another of my women patients produced in one of her dreamsa thing that was intermediate between a bathing-hut at the seaside, an out-side closet in the country and an attic in a town house. The ﬁrst two ele-ments have in common a connection with people naked and undressed;and their combination with the third element leads to the conclusion that340 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 340(in her childhood) an attic had also been a scene of undressing.—Another
dreamer,1a man, produced a composite locality out of two places where
‘treatments’ are carried out: one of them being my consulting-room andthe other the place of entertainment where he had ﬁrst made his wife’s ac-quaintance.—A girl dreamt, after her elder brother had promised to giveher a feast of caviare, that this same brother’s legs were covered all over with
black grains of caviare . The element of ‘ contagion’ (in the moral sense) and
a recollection of a rash in her childhood, which had covered her legs allover with red spots, instead of black ones, had been combined with thegrains of caviare into a new concept—namely the concept of ‘ what she had
got from her brother.’ In this dream, as in others, parts of the human bodywere treated like objects.—In a dream recorded by Ferenczi [1910],
2a
composite image occurred which was made up from the ﬁgure of a doctor
and of a horse and was also dressed in a nightshirt. The element common
to these three components was arrived at in the analysis after the woman-patient had recognized that the nightshirt was an allusion to her father ina scene from her childhood. In all three cases it was a question of an objectof her sexual curiosity. When she was a child she had often been taken byher nurse to a military stud-farm where she had ample opportunities ofgratifying what was at that time her still uninhibited curiosity.
I have asserted above [p. 334] that dreams have no means of expressing
the relation of a contradiction, a contrary or a ‘no.’ I shall now proceed togive a ﬁrst denial of this assertion.
3One class of cases which can be com-
prised under the heading of ‘contraries’ are, as we have seen [p. 338], sim-ply represented by identiﬁcation—cases, that is, in which the idea of anexchange or substitution can be brought into connection with the contrast.I have given a number of instances of this. Another class of contraries in thedream-thoughts, falling into a category which may be described as ‘con-trariwise’ or ‘just the reverse,’ ﬁnd their way into dreams in the followingremarkable fashion, which almost deserves to be described as a joke. The‘just the reverse’ is not itself represented in the dream-content, but revealsits presence in the material through the fact that some piece of the dream-content, which has already been constructed and happens (for some otherreason) to be adjacent to it, is—as it were by an afterthought—turned341 C. The Means of Representation
1 [This sentence was added in 1909.]
2 [The remainder of this paragraph was added in 1911.]
3 [Others will be found below on pp. 351 f. and 442 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 341round the other way. The process is more easily illustrated than described.
In the interesting ‘Up and Down’ dream (pp. 319 ff.) the representation ofthe climbing in the dream was the reverse of what it was in its prototype inthe dream-thoughts—that is, in the introductory scene from Daudet’s Sap-
pho: in the dream the climbing was difﬁcult at ﬁrst but easier later, while inthe Daudet scene it was easy at ﬁrst but more and more difﬁcult later. Fur-ther, the ‘up above’ and ‘down below’ in the dreamer’s relation to hisbrother were represented the other way round in the dream. This pointedto the presence of a reversed or contrary relation between two pieces of thematerial in the dream-thoughts; and we found it in the dreamer’s child-hood phantasy of being carried by his wet-nurse, which was the reverse ofthe situation in the novel, where the hero was carrying his mistress. So tooin my dream of Goethe’s attack on Herr M. (see below, pp. 447 ff.) there isa similar ‘just the reverse’ which has to be put straight before the dream canbe successfully interpreted. In the dream Goethe made an attack on ayoung man, Herr M.; in the real situation contained in the dream-thoughtsa man of importance, my friend [Fliess], had been attacked by an unknownyoung writer. In the dream I based a calculation on the date of Goethe’sdeath; in reality the calculation had been made from the year of the para-lytic patient’s birth. The thought which turned out to be the decisive onein the dream-thoughts was a contradiction of the idea that Goethe shouldbe treated as though he were a lunatic. ‘Just the reverse,’ said [the under -lying meaning of] the dream, ‘if you don’t understand the book, it’s you[the critic] that are feeble-minded, and not the author.’ I think, moreover,that all these dreams of turning things round the other way include a refer-ence to the contemptuous implications of the idea of ‘turning one’s backon something.’
1(E.g. the dreamer’s turning round in relation to his brother
in the Sappho dream [pp. 305 f.].) It is remarkable to observe, moreover,2
how frequently reversal is employed precisely in dreams arising from re-pressed homosexual impulses.
Incidentally,
3reversal, or turning a thing into its opposite, is one of the
means of representation most favoured by the dream-work and one whichis capable of employment in the most diverse direction. It serves in the ﬁrst342 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [The German ‘Kehrseite’ can mean both ‘reverse’ and ‘backside.’ Cf. the vulgar
English phrase ‘arse upwards’ for ‘upside down,’ ‘the wrong way round.’]
2 [This sentence was added in 1911.]
3 [This and the next paragraph were added in 1909.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 342place to give expression to the fulﬁlment of a wish in reference to some
particular element of the dream-thoughts. ‘If only it had been the otherway round!’ This is often the best way of expressing the ego’s reaction to adisagreeable fragment of memory. Again, reversal is of quite special use asa help to the censorship, for it produces a mass of distortion in the materialwhich is to be represented, and this has a positively paralysing effect, to be-gin with, on any attempt at understanding the dream. For that reason, if adream obstinately declines to reveal its meaning, it is always worth whileto see the effect of reversing some particular elements in its manifest con-tent, after which the whole situation often becomes immediately clear.
And, apart from the reversal of subject-matter, chronological reversal
must not be overlooked. Quite a common technique of dream-distortionconsists in representing the outcome of an event or the conclusion of atrain of thought at the beginning of a dream and of placing at its end thepremises on which the conclusion was based or the causes which led tothe event. Anyone who fails to bear in mind this technical methodadopted by dream-distortion will be quite at a loss when confronted withthe task of interpreting a dream.
1
In some instances, indeed,2it is only possible to arrive at the meaning
of a dream after one has carried out quite a number of reversals of its con-tent in various respects. For instance, in the case of a young obsessional343 C. The Means of Representation
1 [Footnote added 1909:] Hysterical attacks sometimes make use of the same kind
of chronological reversal in order to disguise their meaning from observers. For
instance, a hysterical girl needed to represent something in the nature of a briefromance in one of her attacks—a romance of which she had had a phantasy inher unconscious after an encounter with someone on the suburban railway. Sheimagined how the man had been attracted by the beauty of her foot and hadspoken to her while she was reading; whereupon she had gone off with him andhad had a passionate love-scene. Her attack began with a representation of this
love-scene by convulsive twitching of her body, accompanied by movements ofher lips to represent kissing and tightening of her arms to represent embracing.She then hurried into the next room, sat down on a chair, raised her skirt so asto show her foot, pretended to be reading a book and spoke to me (that is, an-swered me).—[ Added 1914:] Cf. in this connection what Artemidorus says: ‘In
interpreting the images seen in dreams one must sometimes follow them fromthe beginning to the end and sometimes from the end to the beginning. . .’[Book I, Chapter XI, Krauss’s translation (1881), 20.]
2 [This paragraph was added in 1911.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 343neurotic, there lay concealed behind one of his dreams the memory of a
death-wish dating from his childhood and directed against his father, ofwhom he had been afraid. Here is the text of the dream: His father wasscolding him for coming home so late . The context in which the dream oc-
curred in the psycho-analytic treatment and the dreamer’s associationsshowed, however, that the original wording must have been that hewas
angry with his father, and that in his view his father always came home
too early (i.e. too soon). He would have preferred it if his father had not
come home at all, and this was the same thing as a death-wish against hisfather. (See pp. 272 f.) For as a small boy, during his father’s temporaryabsence, he had been guilty of an act of sexual aggression against some-one, and as a punishment had been threatened in these words: ‘Just youwait till your father comes back!’
If we wish to pursue our study of the relations between dream-content
and dream-thoughts further, the best plan will be to take dreams them-selves as our point of departure and consider what certain formal charac-
teristics of the method of representation in dreams signify in relation tothe thoughts underlying them. Most prominent among these formalcharacteristics, which cannot fail to impress us in dreams, are the differ-ences in sensory intensity between particular dream-images and in thedistinctness of particular parts of dreams or of whole dreams as comparedwith one another.
The differences in intensity between particular dream-images cover
the whole range extending between a sharpness of deﬁnition which wefeel inclined, no doubt unjustiﬁably, to regard as greater than that of re-ality and an irritating vagueness which we declare characteristic of dreamsbecause it is not completely comparable to any degree of indistinctnesswhich we ever perceive in real objects. Furthermore we usually describean impression which we have of an indistinct object in a dream as ‘ﬂeet-ing,’ while we feel that those dream-images which are more distinct havebeen perceived for a considerable length of time. The question now ariseswhat it is in the material of the dream-thoughts that determines these dif-ferences in the vividness of particular pieces of the content of a dream.
We must begin by countering certain expectations which almost in-
evitably present themselves. Since the material of a dream may include realsensations experienced during sleep, it will probably be presumed thatthese, or the elements in the dream derived from them, are given promi-344 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 344nence in the dream-content by appearing with special intensity; or, con-
versely, that whatever is very specially vivid in a dream can be traced backto real sensations during sleep. In my experience, however, this has neverbeen conﬁrmed. It is not the case that the elements of a dream which arederivatives of real impressions during sleep (i.e. of nervous stimuli) are dis-tinguished by their vividness from other elements which arise from mem-ories. The factor of reality counts for nothing in determining the intensityof dream-images.
Again, it might be expected that the sensory intensity (that is, the vivid-
ness) of particular dream-images would be related to the psychical intensity
of the elements in the dream-thoughts corresponding to them. In the latter,psychical intensity coincides with psychical value : the most intense ele-
ments are also the most important ones—those which form the centre-point of the dream-thoughts. We know, it is true, that these are preciselyelements which, on account of the censorship, cannot as a rule make theirway into the content of the dream; nevertheless, it might well be that theirimmediate derivatives which represent them in the dream might bear ahigher degree of intensity, without necessarily on that account forming thecentre of the dream. But this expectation too is disappointed by a compar-ative study of dreams and the material from which they are derived. Theintensity of the elements in the one has no relation to the intensity of theelements in the other: the fact is that a complete ‘transvaluation of all psy-chical values’ [in Nietzsche’s phrase] takes place between the material of thedream-thoughts and the dream. A direct derivative of what occupies a dom-inating position in the dream-thoughts can often only be discovered pre-cisely in some transitory element of the dream which is quite overshadowedby more powerful images.
The intensity of the elements of a dream turns out to be determined
otherwise—and by two independent factors. In the ﬁrst place, it is easyto see that the elements by which the wish-fulﬁlment is expressed are rep-resented with special intensity. [See pp. 561 f.] And in the second place,analysis shows that the most vivid elements of a dream are the starting-point of the most numerous trains of thought—that the most vivid ele-ments are also those with the most numerous determinants. We shall notbe altering the sense of this empirically based assertion if we put it inthese terms: the greatest intensity is shown by those elements of a dreamon whose formation the greatest amount of condensation has been ex-pended. [Cf. pp. 592.] We may expect that it will eventually turn out to345 C. The Means of Representation9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 345be possible to express this determinant and the other (namely relation to
the wish-fulﬁlment) in a single formula.
The problem with which I have just dealt—the causes of the greater
or less intensity or clarity of particular elements of a dream—is not to beconfounded with another problem, which relates to the varying clarity ofwhole dreams or sections of dreams. In the former case clarity is con-trasted with vagueness, but in the latter case it is contrasted with confu-sion. Nevertheless it cannot be doubted that the increase and decrease ofthe qualities in the two scales run parallel. A section of a dream whichstrikes us as perspicuous usually contains intense elements; a dream whichis obscure, on the other hand, is composed of elements of small intensity.Yet the problem presented by the scale which runs from what is appar-ently clear to what is obscure and confused is far more complicated thanthat of the varying degrees of vividness of dream-elements. Indeed, forreasons which will appear later, the former problem cannot yet be dis-cussed. [See pp. 504 f.]
In a few cases we ﬁnd to our surprise that the impression of clarity or
indistinctness given by a dream has no connection at all with the make-up of the dream itself but arises from the material of the dream-thoughtsand is a constituent of it. Thus I remember a dream of mine which struckme when I woke up as being so particularly well-constructed, ﬂawless andclear that, while I was still half-dazed with sleep, I thought of introducinga new category of dreams which were not subject to the mechanisms ofcondensation and displacement but were to be described as ‘phantasiesduring sleep.’ Closer examination proved that this rarity among dreamsshowed the same gaps and ﬂaws in its structure as any other; and for thatreason I dropped the category of ‘dream-phantasies.’
1The content of the
dream, when it was arrived at, represented me as laying before my friend[Fliess] a difﬁcult and long-sought theory of bisexuality; and the wish- fulﬁlling power of the dream was responsible for our regarding this theory(which, incidentally, was not given in the dream) as clear and ﬂawless.Thus what I had taken to be a judgement on the completed dream wasactually a part, and indeed the essential part, of the dream-content. Thedream-work had in this case encroached, as it were, upon my ﬁrst waking346 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Footnote added 1930:] Whether rightly I am now uncertain. [Freud argues in
favour of there being such a category in some remarks at the end of the discus-
sion of his ﬁrst example in his paper on ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (1922 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 346thoughts and had conveyed to me as a judgement upon the dream the part
of the material of the dream-thoughts which it had not succeeded in rep-
resenting accurately in the dream.1I once came across a precise counter-
part to this in a woman-patient’s dream during analysis. To begin withshe refused altogether to tell it me, ‘because it was so indistinct and mud-dled.’ At length, protesting repeatedly that she felt no certainty that heraccount was correct, she informed me that several people had come intothe dream—she herself, her husband and her father—and that it was asthough she had not known whether her husband was her father, or whoher father was, or something of that sort. This dream, taken in conjunc-tion with her associations during the analytic session, showed beyond adoubt that it was a question of the somewhat commonplace story of a servant-girl who was obliged to confess that she was expecting a baby butwas in doubts as to ‘who the (baby’s) father really was.’
2Thus here again
the lack of clarity shown by the dream was a part of the material whichinstigated the dream: part of this material, that is, was represented in theform of the dream. The form of a dream or the form in which it is dreamt isused with quite surprising frequency for representing its concealed subject-matter.
3
Glosses on a dream, or apparently innocent comments on it, often
serve to disguise a portion of what has been dreamt in the subtlest fash-ion, though in fact betraying it. For instance, a dreamer remarked that atone point ‘the dream had been wiped away’; and the analysis led to an in-fantile recollection of his listening to someone wiping himself after defae-cating. Or here is another example which deserves to be recorded indetail. A young man had a very clear dream which reminded him of somephantasies of his boyhood that had remained conscious. He dreamt thatit was evening and that he was in a hotel at a summer resort. He mistookthe number of his room and went into one in which an elderly lady andher two daughters were undressing and going to bed. He proceeded:‘Here there are some gaps in the dream; there’s something missing. Fi-nally there was a man in the room who tried to throw me out, and I had347 C. The Means of Representation
1 [This subject is discussed much more fully below, on pp. 452 ff.]
2 Her accompanying hysterical symptoms were amenorrhoea and great depression
(which was this patient’s chief symptom). [This dream is discussed on pp. 453
f.]
3 [The last sentence was added in 1909, and from 1914 onwards was printed in
spaced type. The next paragraph was added in 1911.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 347to have a struggle with him.’ He made vain endeavours to recall the gist
and drift of the boyish phantasy to which the dream was evidently allud-ing; until at last the truth emerged that what he was in search of was al-ready in his possession in his remark about the obscure part of the dream.The ‘gaps’ were the genital apertures of the women who were going tobed; and ‘there’s something missing’ described the principal feature of thefemale genitalia. When he was young he had had a consuming curiosityto see a woman’s genitals and had been inclined to hold to the infantilesexual theory according to which women have male organs.
An analogous recollection of another dreamer assumed a very similar
shape.
1He dreamt as follows: ‘I was going into the Volksgarten Restaurant
with Fräulein K . . . . then came an obscure patch, an interruption . . . thenI found myself in the salon of a brothel, where I saw two or three women, oneof them in her chemise and drawers.’
Analysis .—Fräulein K. was the daughter of his former chief, and, as
he himself admitted, a substitute sister of his own. He had seldom had anopportunity of talking to her, but they once had a conversation in which‘it was just as though we had become aware of our sex, it was as though Iwere to say: “I’m a man and you’re a woman.”’ He had only once beeninside the restaurant in question, with his brother-in-law’s sister, a girlwho meant nothing at all to him. Another time he had gone with a groupof three ladies as far as the entrance of the same restaurant. These ladieswere his sister, his sister-in-law and the brother-in-law’s sister who hasjust been mentioned. All of them were highly indifferent to him, but allthree fell into the class of ‘sister.’ He had only seldom visited a brothel—only two or three times in his life.
The interpretation was based on the ‘obscure patch’ and the ‘interrup-
tion’ in the dream, and put forward the view that in his boyish curiosityhe had occasionally, though only seldom, inspected the genitals of a sisterwho was a few years his junior. Some days later he had a conscious recol-lection of the misdeed alluded to by the dream.
The content of all dreams that occur during the same night forms part
of the same whole; the fact of their being divided into several sections, aswell as the grouping and number of those sections—all of this has ameaning and may be regarded as a piece of information arising from the348 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This and the two following paragraphs were added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 348latent dream-thoughts.1In interpreting dreams consisting of several main
sections or, in general, dreams occurring during the same night, the pos-
sibility should not be overlooked that separate and successive dreams ofthis kind may have the same meaning, and may be giving expression tothe same impulses in different material. If so, the ﬁrst of these homolo-gous dreams to occur is often the more distorted and timid, while thesucceeding one will be more conﬁdent and distinct.
Pharaoh’s dreams in the Bible of the kine and the ears of corn, which
were interpreted by Joseph, were of this kind. They are reported morefully by Josephus ( Ancient History of the Jews, Book 2, Chapter 5) than in
the Bible. After the King had related his ﬁrst dream, he said: ‘After I hadseen this vision, I awaked out of my sleep; and, being in disorder, andconsidering with myself what this appearance should be, I fell asleepagain, and saw another dream, more wonderful than the foregoing, whichdid more affright and disturb me . . .’ After hearing the King’s account ofthe dream, Joseph replied: ‘This dream, O King, although seen under twoforms, signiﬁes one and the same event . . .’ [Whiston’s translation, 1874,1,127–8.]
In his ‘Contribution to the Psychology of Rumour,’ Jung (1910b), de-
scribes how the disguised erotic dream of a school-girl was understood byher school-friends without any interpreting and how it was further elab-orated and modiﬁed. He remarks in connection with one of these dreamstories: ‘The ﬁnal thought in a long series of dream-images contains pre-cisely what the ﬁrst image in the series had attempted to portray. Thecensorship keeps the complex at a distance as long as possible by a succes-sion of fresh symbolic screens, displacements, innocent disguises, etc.’(Ibid., 87.) Scherner (1861, 166) was well acquainted with this peculiar-ity of the method of representation in dreams and describes it, in connec-tion with his theory of organic stimuli [see pp. 111 f.], as a special law:‘Lastly, however, in all symbolic dream-structures which arise from par-ticular nervous stimuli, the imagination observes a general law: at the be-ginning of a dream it depicts the object from which the stimulus arisesonly by the remotest and most inexact allusions, but at the end, when the349 C. The Means of Representation
1 [This sentence was added in 1909. The remainder of this paragraph, and the
three following ones, were added in 1911. Freud deals with the subject again to-
wards the end of Lecture XXIX of his New Introductory Lectures (1933a). It has
already been touched upon on pp. 331 ff., and is mentioned again on p. 413,p. 452 n. and p. 528.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 349pictorial effusion has exhausted itself, it nakedly presents the stimulus it-
self, or, as the case may be, the organ concerned or the function of thatorgan, and therewith the dream, having designated its actual organiccause, achieves its end. . . .’
Otto Rank (1910) has produced a neat conﬁrmation of this law of
Scherner’s. A girl’s dream reported by him was composed of two separatedreams dreamt, with an interval between them, during the same night,the second of which ended with an orgasm. It was possible to carry out adetailed interpretation of this second dream even without many contri-butions from the dreamer; and the number of connections between thecontents of the two dreams made it possible to see that the ﬁrst dreamrepresented in a more timid fashion the same thing as the second. So thatthe second, the dream with the orgasm, helped towards the complete ex-planation of the ﬁrst. Rank rightly bases upon this example a discussionof the general signiﬁcance of dreams of orgasm or emission for the theoryof dreaming. [See pp. 412 ff.]
Nevertheless in my experience it is only rarely that one is in a position
to interpret the clarity or confusion of a dream by the presence of cer-tainty or doubt in its material. Later on I shall have to disclose a factor indream-formation which I have not yet mentioned and which exercises thedetermining inﬂuence upon the scale of these qualities in any particulardream. [See pp. 504 f.]
Sometimes, in a dream in which the same situation and setting have
persisted for some time, an interruption will occur which is described inthese words: ‘But then it was as though at the same time it was anotherplace, and there such and such a thing happened.’ After a while the mainthread of the dream may be resumed, and what interrupted it turns out tobe a subordinate clause in the dream-material—an interpolated thought.A conditional in the dream-thoughts has been represented in the dream bysimultaneity: ‘if’ has become ‘when.’
What is the meaning of the sensation of inhibited movement which
appears so commonly in dreams and verges so closely upon anxiety? Onetries to move forward but ﬁnds oneself glued to the spot, or one tries toreach something but is held up by a series of obstacles. A train is on thepoint of departure but one is unable to catch it. One raises one’s hand to350 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 350avenge an insult but ﬁnds it powerless. And so forth. We have already met
with this sensation in dreams of exhibiting [pp. 256 ff.; cf. also p. 302],but have not as yet made any serious attempt to interpret it. An easy butinsufﬁcient answer would be to say that motor paralysis prevails in sleepand that we become aware of it in the sensation we are discussing. But itmay be asked why in that case we are not perpetually dreaming of theseinhibited movements; and it is reasonable to suppose that this sensation,though one which can be summoned up at any moment during sleep,serves to facilitate some particular kind of representation, and is onlyaroused when the material of the dream-thoughts needs to be representedin that way.
This ‘not being able to do anything’ does not always appear in dreams
as a sensation but is sometimes simply a part of the content of the dream.A case of this sort seems to me particularly well qualiﬁed to throw lighton the meaning of this feature of dreaming. Here is an abridged versionof a dream in which I was apparently charged with dishonesty. The place
was a mixture of a private sanatorium and several other institutions. A man-servant appeared to summon me to an examination. I knew in the dream thatsomething had been missed and that the examination was due to a suspicionthat I had appropriated the missing article. (The analysis showed that the
examination was to be taken in two senses and included a medical exam-ination.) Conscious of my innocence and of the fact that I held the position of
a consultant in the establishment, I accompanied the servant quietly. At thedoor we were met by another servant, who said, pointing to me: ‘Why haveyou brought him? He’s a respectable person.’ I then went, unattended, into alarge hall, with machines standing in it, which reminded me of an Infernowith its hellish instruments of punishment. Stretched out on one apparatus Isaw one of my colleagues, who had every reason to take some notice of me; buthe paid no attention. I was then told I could go. But I could not ﬁnd my hatand could not go after all.
The wish-fulﬁlment of the dream evidently lay in my being recognized
as an honest man and told I could go. There must therefore have been allkinds of material in the dream-thoughts containing a contradiction of this.That I could go was a sign of my absolution. If therefore something hap-pened at the end of the dream which prevented my going, it seems plausi-ble to suppose that the suppressed material containing the contradictionwas making itself felt at that point. My not being able to ﬁnd my hat meantaccordingly: ‘After all you’re not an honest man.’ Thus the ‘not being able351 C. The Means of Representation9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 351to do something’ in this dream was a way of expressing a contradiction—a
‘no’—so that my earlier statement [p. 334] that dreams cannot express a‘no’ requires correction.
1
In other dreams, in which the ‘not carrying out’ of a movement occurs
as a sensation and not simply as a situation, the sensation of the inhibitionof a movement gives a more forcible expression to the same contradiction—it expresses a volition which is opposed by a counter-volition. Thus thesensation of the inhibition of a movement represents a conﬂict of will. [Cf.p. 264.] We shall learn later [pp. 567] that the motor paralysis accompa-nying sleep is precisely one of the fundamental determinants of the psy-chical process during dreaming. Now an impulse transmitted along themotor paths is nothing other than a volition, and the fact of our being socertain that we shall feel that impulse inhibited during sleep is what makesthe whole process so admirably suited for representing an act of volitionand a ‘no’ which opposes it. It is also easy to see, on my explanation ofanxiety, why the sensation of an inhibition of will approximates so closelyto anxiety and is so often linked with it in dreams. Anxiety is a libidinalimpulse which has its origin in the unconscious and is inhibited by thepreconscious.
2When, therefore, the sensation of inhibition is linked with
anxiety in a dream, it must be a question of an act of volition which wasat one time capable of generating libido—that is, it must be a question ofa sexual impulse.352 VI. The Dream-Work
1 In the complete analysis there was a reference to an event in my childhood,
reached by the following chain of association. ‘Der Mohr hat seine Schuldigkeit
getan, der Mohr kann gehen .’ [‘The Moor has done his duty, the Moor can go.’
(Schiller, Fiesco , III, 4.) ‘Schuldigkeit’ (‘duty’) is actually a misquotation for ‘Ar-
beit’ (‘work’).] Then came a facetious conundrum: ‘How old was the Moorwhen he had done his duty?’—‘One year old, because then he could go[‘gehen ’—both ‘to go’ and ‘to walk’].’ (It appears that I came into the world with
such a tangle of black hair that my young mother declared I was a littleMoor.)—My not being able to ﬁnd my hat was an occurrence from waking lifewhich was used in more than one sense. Our housemaid, who was a genius atputting things away, had hidden it.—The end of this dream also concealed a re-jection of some melancholy thoughts about death: ‘I am far from having donemy duty, so I must not go yet.’—Birth and death were dealt with in it, just asthey had been in the dream of Goethe and the paralytic patient, which I haddreamt a short time before. (See pp. 342, 447 ff. [and 456 ff.].)
2 [Footnote added 1930:] In the light of later knowledge this statement can no
longer stand. [Cf. p. 185, n. 2. See also p. 503 n.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 352I shall deal elsewhere (see below [pp. 493 f.]) with the meaning and
psychical signiﬁcance of the judgement which often turns up in dreams
expressed in the phrase ‘after all this is only a dream.’1Here I will merely
say in anticipation that it is intended to detract from the importance ofwhat is being dreamt. The interesting and allied problem, as to what ismeant when some of the content of a dream is described in the dream it-self as ‘dreamt’—the enigma of the ‘dream within a dream’—has beensolved in a similar sense by Stekel [1909, 459 ff.], who has analysed someconvincing examples. The intention is, once again, to detract from theimportance of what is ‘dreamt’ in the dream, to rob it of its reality. Whatis dreamt in a dream after waking from the ‘dream within a dream’ iswhat the dream-wish seeks to put in the place of an obliterated reality. Itis safe to suppose, therefore, that what has been ‘dreamt’ in the dream isa representation of the reality, the true recollection, while the continua-tion of the dream, on the contrary, merely represents what the dreamerwishes. To include something in a ‘dream within a dream’ is thus equiva-lent to wishing that the thing described as a dream had never happened.In other words,
2if a particular event is inserted into a dream as a dream
by the dream-work itself, this implies the most decided conﬁrmation ofthe reality of the event—the strongest afﬁrmation of it. The dream-work
makes use of dreaming as a form of repudiation, and so conﬁrms the dis-covery that dreams are wish-fulﬁlments.
3
(D)
CONSIDERATIONS OF REPRESENTABILITY
We have been occupied so far with investigating the means by which
dreams represent the relations between the dream-thoughts. In the courseof this investigation, however, we have more than once touched upon thefurther topic of the general nature of the modiﬁcations which the material353 D. Considerations of Representability
1 [This paragraph (except for its penultimate sentence and part of its last sentence)
was added in 1911.]
2 [This sentence was added in 1919.]
3 [The last clause was added in 1919.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 353of the dream-thoughts undergoes for the purpose of the formation of a
dream. We have learnt that that material, stripped to a large extent of itsrelations, is submitted to a process of compression, while at the same timedisplacements of intensity between its elements necessarily bring about apsychical transvaluation of the material. The displacements we have hith-erto considered turned out to consist in the replacing of some one partic-ular idea by another in some way closely associated with it, and they wereused to facilitate condensation in so far as, by their means, instead of two
elements, a single common element intermediate between them found itsway into the dream. We have not yet referred to any other sort of displace-ment. Analyses show us, however, that another sort exists and that it re-veals itself in a change in the verbal expression of the thoughts concerned.
In both cases there is a displacement along a chain of associations; but aprocess of such a kind can occur in various psychical spheres, and the out-come of the displacement may in one case be that one element is replacedby another, while the outcome in another case may be that a single ele-ment has its verbal form replaced by another.
This second species of displacement which occurs in dream-formation
is not only of great theoretical interest but is also specially well calculatedto explain the appearance of fantastic absurdity in which dreams are dis-guised. The direction taken by the displacement usually results in a colour-less and abstract expression in the dream-thought being exchanged for apictorial and concrete one. The advantage, and accordingly the purpose,of such a change jumps to the eyes. A thing that is pictorial is, from thepoint of view of a dream, a thing that is capable of being represented : it can
be introduced into a situation in which abstract expressions offer the samekind of difﬁculties to representation in dreams as a political leading articlein a newspaper would offer to an illustrator. But not only representability,but the interests of condensation and the censorship as well, can be thegainers from this exchange. A dream-thought is unusable so long as it isexpressed in an abstract form; but when once it has been transformed intopictorial language, contrasts and identiﬁcations of the kind which thedream-work requires, and which it creates if they are not already present,can be established more easily than before between the new form of ex-pression and the remainder of the material underlying the dream. This isso because in every language concrete terms, in consequence of the historyof their development, are richer in associations than conceptual ones. Wemay suppose that a good part of the intermediate work done during theformation of a dream, which seeks to reduce the dispersed dream-thoughts354 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 354to the most succinct and uniﬁed expression possible, proceeds along the
line of ﬁnding appropriate verbal transformations for the individualthoughts. Any one thought, whose form of expression may happen to beﬁxed for other reasons, will operate in a determinant and selective manneron the possible forms of expression allotted to the other thoughts, and itmay do so, perhaps, from the very start—as is the case in writing a poem.If a poem is to be written in rhymes, the second line of a couplet is limitedby two conditions: it must express an appropriate meaning, and the ex-pression of that meaning must rhyme with the ﬁrst line. No doubt the bestpoem will be one in which we fail to notice the intention of ﬁnding arhyme, and in which the two thoughts have, by mutual inﬂuence, chosenfrom the very start a verbal expression which will allow a rhyme to emergewith only slight subsequent adjustment.
In a few instances a change of expression of this kind assists dream-
 condensation even more directly, by ﬁnding a form of words which owingto its ambiguity is able to give expression to more than one of the dream-thoughts. In this way the whole domain of verbal wit is put at the disposalof the dream-work. There is no need to be astonished at the part played bywords in dream-formation. Words, since they are the nodal points of nu-merous ideas, may be regarded as predestined to ambiguity; and the neu-roses (e.g. in framing obsessions and phobias), no less than dreams, makeunashamed use of the advantages thus offered by words for purposes ofcondensation and disguise.
1It is easy to show that dream-distortion too
proﬁts from displacement of expression. If one ambiguous word is used instead of two unambiguous ones the result is misleading; and if our every-day, sober method of expression is replaced by a pictorial one, our under-standing is brought to a halt, particularly since a dream never tells uswhether its elements are to be interpreted literally or in a ﬁgurative sense orwhether they are to be connected with the material of the dream-thoughtsdirectly or through the intermediary of some interpolated phraseology.
2In
interpreting any dream-element it is in general doubtful355 D. Considerations of Representability
1 [Footnote added 1909:] See my volume on jokes (1905 c) [especially the later part
of Chapter VI] and the use of ‘verbal bridges’ in the solution of neurotic symp-
toms. [See, e.g., the synthesis of Dora’s ﬁrst dream at the end of Section II ofFreud, 1905e (where the term ‘switch-words’ is also used), and the solution of
the ‘Rat Man’s’ rat-obsession in Section I(G) of Freud, 1909 d.]
2 [The remainder of this paragraph was added as a footnote in 1909 and included
in the text in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 355(a) whether it is to be taken in a positive or negative sense (as an an-
tithetic relation),
(b) whether it is to be interpreted historically (as a recollection),
(c) whether it is to be interpreted symbolically, or
(d) whether its interpretation is to depend on its wording. Yet, in
spite of all this ambiguity, it is fair to say that the productions of thedream-work, which, it must be remembered, are not made with the inten-
tion of being understood , present no greater difﬁculties to their translators
than do the ancient hieroglyphic scripts to those who seek to read them.
I have already given several examples of representations in dreams which
are only held together by the ambiguity of their wording. (For instance,‘She opened her mouth properly’ in the dream of Irma’s injection [p. 135]and ‘I could not go after all’ in the dream which I last quoted [pp. 351].) Iwill now record a dream in which a considerable part was played by theturning of abstract thought into pictures. The distinction between dream-interpretation of this kind and interpretation by means of symbolism canstill be drawn quite sharply. In the case of symbolic dream-interpretationthe key to the symbolization is arbitrarily chosen by the interpreter; whereasin our cases of verbal disguise the keys are generally known and laid downby ﬁrmly established linguistic usage. If one has the right idea at one’s dis-posal at the right moment, one can solve dreams of this kind wholly or inpart even independently of information from the dreamer.
A lady of my acquaintance had the following dream: She was at the
Opera. A Wagner opera was being performed, and had lasted till a quarter toeight in the morning. There were tables set out in the stalls, at which peoplewere eating and drinking. Her cousin, who had just got back from his honey-moon, was sitting at one of the tables with his young wife, and an aristocratwas sitting beside them. Her cousin’s wife, so it appeared, had brought himback with her from the honeymoon, quite openly, just as one might bring backa hat. In the middle of the stalls there was a high tower, which had a platformon top of it surrounded by an iron railing. High up at the top was the con-ductor, who had the features of Hans Richter. He kept running round the rail-ing, and was perspiring violently; and from that position he was conductingthe orchestra, which was grouped about the base of the tower. She herself wassitting in a box with a woman friend (whom I knew). Her younger sister
wanted to hand her up a large lump of coal from the stalls, on the ground thatshe had not known it would be so long, and must be simply freezing by now.(As though the boxes required to be heated during the long performance.)356 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 356Even though the dream was well focused on a single situation, yet in
other respects it was sufﬁciently senseless: the tower in the middle of the
stalls, for instance, with the conductor directing the orchestra from thetop of it! And above all the coal that her sister handed up to her! I delib-erately refrained from asking for an analysis of the dream. But since I hadsome knowledge of the dreamer’s personal relations, I was able to inter-pret certain pieces of it independently of her. I know she had had a greatdeal of sympathy for a musician whose career had been prematurely cutshort by insanity. So I decided to take the tower in the stalls metaphori-cally. It then emerged that the man whom she had wanted to see in HansRichter’s place towered high above the other members of the orchestra.
The tower might be described as a composite picture formed by apposi-tion. The lower part of its structure represented the man’s greatness; therailing at the top, behind which he was running round like a prisoner oran animal in a cage—this was an allusion to the unhappy man’s name
1—
represented his ultimate fate. The two ideas might have been brought to-gether in the word ‘ Narrenturm .’
2
Having thus discovered the mode of representation adopted by the
dream, we might attempt to use the same key for solving its second ap-parent absurdity—the coal handed up to the dreamer by her sister. ‘Coal’must mean ‘secret love’:
Kein Feuer, keine Kohle
kann brennen so heissals wie heimliche Liebe ,
von der niemand nichts weiss.
3
She herself and her woman friend had been left unmarried [German‘sitzen geblieben ,’ literally ‘left sitting’]. Her younger sister, who still had
prospects of marriage, handed her up the coal ‘because she had notknown it would be so long.’ The dream did not specify what would be so357 D. Considerations of Representability
1 [Footnote added 1925:] Hugo Wolf.
2 [Literally ‘Fools’ Tower’—an old term for an insane asylum.]
3[No ﬁre , no coal
So hotly glows
As secret loveOf which no one knows.
German Volkslied .]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 357long. If it were a story, we should say ‘the performance’; but since it is a
dream, we may take the phrase as an independent entity, decide that itwas used ambiguously and add the words ‘before she got married.’ Ourinterpretation of ‘secret love’ is further supported by the mention of thedreamer’s cousin sitting with his wife in the stalls, and by the open love-
affair attributed to the latter. The dream was dominated by the antithesisbetween secret and open love and between the dreamer’s own ﬁre and thecoldness of the young wife. In both cases, moreover, there was someone‘highly-placed’—a term applying equally to the aristocrat and to the mu-sician on whom such high hopes had been pinned.
1
The foregoing discussion has led us at last to the discovery of a third
factor2whose share in the transformation of the dream-thoughts into the
dream-content is not to be underrated: namely, considerations of repre-sentability in the peculiar psychical material of which dreams make use —for
the most part, that is, representability in visual images. Of the varioussubsidiary thoughts attached to the essential dream-thoughts, those willbe preferred which admit of visual representation; and the dream-workdoes not shrink from the effort of recasting unadaptable thoughts into anew verbal form—even into a less usual one—provided that that processfacilitates representation and so relieves the psychological pressure causedby constricted thinking. This pouring of the content of a thought intoanother mould may at the same time serve the purposes of the activity ofcondensation and may create connections, which might not otherwisehave been present, with some other thought; while this second thoughtitself may already have had its original form of expression changed, witha view to meeting the ﬁrst one half-way.
Herbert Silberer (1909)
3has pointed out a good way of directly observ-
ing the transformation of thoughts into pictures in the process of formingdreams and so of studying this one factor of the dream-work in isolation.If, when he was in a fatigued and sleepy condition, he set himself some in-tellectual task, he found that it often happened that the thought escapedhim and that in its place a picture appeared, which he was then able to rec-ognize as a substitute for the thought. Silberer describes these substitutes358 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [The element of absurdity in this dream is commented upon on p. 444.]
2 [The two previous ones being condensation and displacement.]
3 [This paragraph and the subsequent quotation from Silberer were added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 358by the not very appropriate term of ‘auto-symbolic.’ I will here quote a few
examples from Silberer’s paper [ibid., 519–22], and I shall have occasion,on account of certain characteristics of the phenomena concerned, to re-turn to them later. [See pp. 507 ff.]
‘Example 1.—I thought of having to revise an uneven passage in an
 essay.
‘Symbol.—I saw myself planing a piece of wood.’‘Example 5.—I endeavoured to bring home to myself the aim of certain
metaphysical studies which I was proposing to make. Their aim, I re-ﬂected, was to work one’s way through to ever higher forms of conscious-ness and layers of existence, in one’s search for the bases of existence.
‘Symbol.—I was pushing a long knife under a cake, as though to lift
out a slice.
‘Interpretation.—My motion with the knife meant the “working my
way through” which was in question. . . . Here is the explanation of thesymbolism. It is from time to time my business at meals to cut up a cakeand distribute the helpings. I perform the task with a long, ﬂexibleknife—which demands some care. In particular, to lift out the slicescleanly after they have been cut offers certain difﬁculties; the knife mustbe pushed carefully under the slice (corresponding to the slow “working
my way through” to reach the “bases”). But there is yet more symbolismin the picture. For the cake in the symbol was a “Dobos” cake—a cakewith a number of “layers” through which, in cutting it, the knife has topenetrate (the “layers” of consciousness and thought).’
‘Example 9.—I had lost the thread in a train of thought. I tried to ﬁnd it
again, but had to admit that the starting-point had completely escaped me.
‘Symbol.—Part of a compositor’s forme, with the last lines of type
fallen away.’
In view of the part played by jokes, quotations, songs and proverbs in
the mental life of educated people, it would fully agree with our expecta-tions if disguises of such kinds were used with extreme frequency for repre-senting dream-thoughts. What, for instance, is the meaning in a dream ofa number of carts, each ﬁlled with a different sort of vegetable? They standfor a wishful contrast to ‘ Kraut und Rüben ’ [literally, ‘cabbages and tur -
nips’], that is to say to ‘higgledy-piggledy,’ and accordingly signify ‘dis -order.’ I am surprised that this dream has only been reported to me once.
1359 D. Considerations of Representability
1 [Footnote added 1925:] I have in fact never met with this image again; so I have
lost conﬁdence in the correctness of the interpretation.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 359A dream-symbolism of universal validity has only emerged in the case of a
few subjects, on the basis of generally familiar allusions and verbal substi-tutes. Moreover a good part of this symbolism is shared by dreams withpsychoneuroses, legends and popular customs.
1
Indeed, when we look into the matter more closely, we must recognize
the fact that the dream-work is doing nothing original in making substi-tutions of this kind. In order to gain its ends—in this case the possibilityof a representation unhampered by censorship—it merely follows thepaths which it ﬁnds already laid down in the unconscious; and it givespreference to those transformations of the repressed material which canalso become conscious in the form of jokes or allusions and of which thephantasies of neurotic patients are so full. At this point we suddenly reachan understanding of Scherner’s dream-interpretations, whose essential cor-rectness I have defended elsewhere [pp. 109 ff. and 247]. The imagina-tion’s pre-occupation with the subject’s own body is by no means peculiarto dreams or characteristic only of them. My analyses have shown me thatit is habitually present in the unconscious thoughts of neurotics, and thatit is derived from sexual curiosity, which,  in growing youths or girls, is di-
rected to the genitals of the other sex, and to those of their own as well.Nor, as Scherner [1861] and Volkelt [1875] have rightly insisted, is ahouse the only circle of ideas employed for symbolizing the body; and thisis equally true of dreams and of the unconscious phantasies of neurosis. Itis true that I know patients who have retained an architectural symbolismfor the body and the genitals. (Sexual interest ranges far beyond the sphereof the external genitalia.) For these patients pillars and columns representthe legs (as they do in the Song of Solomon ), every gateway stands for one
of the bodily oriﬁces (a ‘hole’), every water-pipe is a reminder of the uri-nary apparatus, and so on. But the circle of ideas centring round plant-lifeor the kitchen may just as readily be chosen to conceal sexual images.
2In
the former case the way has been well prepared by linguistic usage, itselfthe precipitate of imaginative similes reaching back to remote antiquity:e.g. the Lord’s vineyard, the seed, and the maiden’s garden in the Song of
Solomon. The ugliest as well as the most intimate details of sexual life maybe thought and dreamt of in seemingly innocent allusions to activities inthe kitchen; and the symptoms of hysteria could never be interpreted if we360 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [The subject of dream-symbolism is treated at length in the next section.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] Abundant evidence of this is to be found in the three
supplementary volumes to Fuchs (1909–12).9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 360forgot that sexual symbolism can ﬁnd its best hiding-place behind what is
commonplace and inconspicuous. There is a valid sexual meaning behindthe neurotic child’s intolerance of blood or raw meat, or his nausea at thesight of eggs or macaroni, and behind the enormous exaggeration in neu-rotics of the natural human dread of snakes. Wherever neuroses make useof such disguises they are following paths along which all humanity passedin the earliest periods of civilization—paths of whose continued existencetoday, under the thinnest of veils, evidence is to be found in linguistic us-ages, superstitions and customs.
I will now append the ‘ﬂowery’ dream dreamt by one of my women
patients which I have already [p. 331] promised to record. I have indi-cated in small capitals those elements in it that are to be given a sexual in-terpretation. The dreamer quite lost her liking for this pretty dream afterit had been interpreted.
(a) Introductory Dream: She went into the kitchen, where her two
maidservants were, and found fault with them for not having got her ‘bite offood’ ready. At the same time she saw quite a quantity of crockery standingupside down to drain, common crockery piled up in heaps. Later addition:
The two maidservants went to fetch some water and had to step into a kindof river which came right up to the house into the yard .
1
(b) Main Dream2: She was descending from a height3over some strangely
constructed palisades or fences, which were put together into large panels, andconsisted of small squares of wattling.
4It was not intended for climbing over;
she had trouble in ﬁnding a place to put her feet in and felt glad that her dresshad not been caught anywhere, so that she had stayed respectable as she wentalong.
5She was holding a big branch in her hand6; actually it was like a
tree, covered over with red blossoms , branching and spreading out.7There361 D. Considerations of Representability
1 For the interpretation of this introductory dream, which is to be interpreted as a
causal dependent clause, see p. 331. [Cf. also pp. 335 and 340.]
2 Describing the course of her life.
3 Her high descent: a wishful antithesis to the introductory dream.
4 A composite picture, uniting two localities: what were known as the ‘attics’ of
her family home, where she used to play with her brother, the object of her later
phantasies, and a farm belonging to a bad uncle who used to tease her.
5 A wishful antithesis to a real recollection of her uncle’s farm, where she used to
throw off her clothes in her sleep.
6 Just as the angel carries a sprig of lilies in pictures of the Annunciation.
7 For the explanation of this composite image see p. 354: innocence, menstrua-
tion, La dame aux camélias.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 361was an idea of their being cherry- blossom; but they also looked like double
camellias , though of course those do not grow on trees. As she went down,
ﬁrst she had one, then suddenly two, and later again one.1When she got
down, the lower blossoms were already a good deal faded. Then she saw,
after she had got down, a manservant who—she felt inclined to say—was
combing a similar tree, that is to say he was using a piece of wood to drag
out some thick tufts of hair that were hanging down from it like moss.
Some other workmen had cut down similar branches from a garden and
thrown them into the road , where they lay about, so that a lot of people
took some. But she asked whether that was all right—whether she mighttake one too .
2A young man (someone she knew, a stranger) was standing
in the garden; she went up to him to ask how branches of that kind could
be transplanted into her own garden .3He embraced her; whereupon
she struggled and asked him what he was thinking of and whether he thoughtpeople could embrace her like that. He said there was no harm in that: it wasallowed.
4He then said he was willing to go into the other garden with her,
to show her how the planting was done, and added something she could notquite understand: ‘Anyhow, I need three yards (later she gave it as: three
square yards ) or three fathoms of ground.’ It was as though he were asking her
for something in return for his willingness, as though he intended to com-
pensate himself in her garden, or as though he wanted to cheat some law
or other, to get some advantage from it without causing her harm. Whetherhe really showed her something, she had no idea.
This dream, which I have brought forward on account of its symbolic
elements, may be described as a ‘biographical’ one. Dreams of this kind oc-cur frequently during psycho-analysis, but perhaps only rarely outside it.
5362 VI. The Dream-Work
1 Referring to the multiplicity of the people involved in her phantasy.
2 That is whether she might pull one down, i.e. masturbate. [‘ Sich einen herunter-
reissen ’ or ‘ ausreissen ’ (literally, ‘to pull one down’ or ‘out’) are vulgar German
terms equivalent to the English ‘to toss oneself off.’ Freud had already drawn at-
tention to this symbolism at the end of his paper on ‘Screen Memories’ (1899 a);
see also below, pp. 400 f.]
3 The branch had long since come to stand for the male genital organ; incidentally
it also made a plain allusion to her family name.
4 This, as well as what next follows, related to marriage precautions.
5 [This paragraph was added in 1925.— Footnote added (to the preceding para-
graph) 1911:] A similar ‘biographical’ dream will be found below as the third ofmy examples of dream-symbolism [p. 377.] Another one has been recorded atlength by Rank [1910], and another, which must be read ‘in reverse,’ by Stekel9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 362I naturally have at my disposal1a superﬂuity of material of this kind,
but to report it would involve us too deeply in a consideration of neurotic
conditions. It all leads to the same conclusion, namely that there is no ne-cessity to assume that any peculiar symbolizing activity of the mind is operating in the dream-work, but that dreams make use of any symboliza-tions which are already present in unconscious thinking, because they ﬁtin better with the requirements of dream-construction on account of theirrepresentability and also because as a rule they escape censorship.
(E)
REPRESENTATION BY SYMBOLS IN 
DREAMS—SOME FURTHER TYPICAL DREAMS2
The analysis of this last, biographical, dream is clear evidence that I
recognized the presence of symbolism in dreams from the very beginning.But it was only by degrees and as my experience increased that I arrived363 E. Representation by Symbols
(1909, 486).—[A reference to ‘biographical’ dreams will be found near the end
of Freud’s ‘History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’ (1914 d).]
1 [In the ﬁrst three editions, 1900, 1909 and 1911, this paragraph was preceded by
another, which was omitted from 1914 onwards. The deleted paragraph ran as fol-lows: ‘I must mention another circle of ideas which often serves as a disguise forsexual material both in dreams and in neuroses: namely ideas connected withchanging house. “Changing house” may easily be replaced by the word“Ausziehen” [meaning both “moving house” and “undressing,”] and is thus con-
nected with the subject of “clothing.” If there is also a lift or elevator in the dream,we shall be reminded of the English word “to lift,” that is, “to lift one’s clothes.”’]
2 [With the exception of two paragraphs (on p. 404) none of Section E of this
chapter appeared in the ﬁrst edition of the book. As explained in the Editor’s In-troduction (p. xiii), much of the material was added in the 1909 and 1911 edi-tions, but in them it was included in Chapter V under the heading of ‘TypicalDreams’ (Section D of that chapter). In the edition of 1914 the present sectionwas ﬁrst constituted, partly from the material previously added to Chapter Vand partly from further new material. Still more material was added in subse-quent editions. In view of these complications, in this section a date has beenadded in square brackets at the end of each paragraph. It will be understoodfrom what has been said that material dated 1909 and 1911 originally appearedin Chapter V and was transferred to its present position in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 363at a full appreciation of its extent and signiﬁcance, and I did so under the
inﬂuence of the contributions of Wilhelm Stekel (1911), about whom afew words will not be out of place here. [1925.]
That writer, who has perhaps damaged psycho-analysis as much as he
has beneﬁted it, brought forward a large number of unsuspected transla-tions of symbols; to begin with they were met with scepticism, but laterthey were for the most part conﬁrmed and had to be accepted. I shall notbe belittling the value of Stekel’s services if I add that the sceptical reservewith which his proposals were received was not without justiﬁcation. Forthe examples by which he supported his interpretations were often uncon-vincing, and he made use of a method which must be rejected as scientiﬁ-cally untrustworthy. Stekel arrived at his interpretations of symbols by wayof intuition, thanks to a peculiar gift for the direct understanding of them.But the existence of such a gift cannot be counted upon generally, its ef-fectiveness is exempt from all criticism and consequently its ﬁndings haveno claim to credibility. It is as though one sought to base the diagnosis ofinfectious diseases upon olfactory impressions received at the patient’sbedside—though there have undoubtedly been clinicians who could ac-complish more than other people by means of the sense of smell (which isusually atrophied) and were really able to diagnose a case of enteric feverby smell. [1925.]
Advances in psycho-analytic experience have brought to our notice pa-
tients who have shown a direct understanding of dream-symbolism ofthis kind to a surprising extent. They were often sufferers from dementiapraecox, so that for a time there was an inclination to suspect everydreamer who had this grasp of symbols of being a victim of that disease.
1
But such is not the case. It is a question of a personal gift or peculiaritywhich has no visible pathological signiﬁcance. [1925.]
When we have become familiar with the abundant use made of sym-
bolism for representing sexual material in dreams, the question is boundto arise of whether many of these symbols do not occur with a perma-nently ﬁxed meaning, like the ‘grammalogues’ in shorthand; and we shallfeel tempted to draw up a new ‘dream-book’ on the decoding principle[see pp. 123 f.]. On that point there is this to be said: this symbolism isnot peculiar to dreams, but is characteristic of unconscious ideation, in364 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Freud remarks elsewhere (1913a) that, just as the presence of dementia praecox
facilitates the interpretation of symbols, so an obsessional neurosis makes it more
difﬁcult.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 364particular among the people, and it is to be found in folklore, and in pop-
ular myths, legends, linguistic idioms, proverbial wisdom and currentjokes, to a more complete extent than in dreams. [1909.]
It would therefore carry us far beyond the sphere of dream-interpretation
if we were to do justice to the signiﬁcance of symbols and discuss the nu-merous, and to a large extent still unsolved, problems attaching to the con-cept of a symbol.
1We must restrict ourselves here to remarking that
representation by a symbol is among the indirect methods of representa-tion, but that all kinds of indications warn us against lumping it in withother forms of indirect representation without being able to form any clearconceptual picture of their distinguishing features. In a number of casesthe element in common between a symbol and what it represents is obvi-ous; in others it is concealed and the choice of the symbol seems puzzling.It is precisely these latter cases which must be able to throw light upon theultimate meaning of the symbolic relation, and they indicate that it is of agenetic character. Things that are symbolically connected today were prob-ably united in the prehistoric times by conceptual and linguistic identity.
2
The symbolic relation seems to be a relic and a mark of former identity. Inthis connection we may observe how in a number of cases the use of acommon symbol extends further than the use of a common language, aswas already pointed out by Schubert (1814).
3A number of symbols are as
old as language itself, while others (e.g. ‘airship,’ ‘Zeppelin’) are beingcoined continuously down to the present time. [1914.]365 E. Representation by Symbols
1 [Footnote 1911:] Cf. the works of Bleuler [1910] and of his Zürich pupils,
Maeder [1908], Abraham [1909], etc., on symbolism, and the non-medical
writers to whom they refer (Kleinpaul, etc.). [ Added 1914:] What is most to the
point on this subject will be found in Rank and Sachs (1913, Chapter I). [ Added
1925:] See further Jones (1916).
2[Footnote added 1925:] This view would be powerfully supported by a theory put
forward by Dr. Hans Sperber (1912). He is of the opinion that all primal wordsreferred to sexual things but afterwards lost their sexual meaning through beingapplied to other things and activities which were compared with the sexual ones.
3 [This last clause was added in 1919.—Footnote 1914:] For instance, according to
Ferenczi [see Rank, 1912 a, 100], a ship moving on the water occurs in dreams of
micturition in Hungarian dreamers, though the term ‘schiffen’ [‘to ship’; cf. vulgarEnglish ‘to pump-ship’] is unknown in that language. (See also pp. 380 below.)In dreams of speakers of French and other Romance languages a room is used tosymbolize a woman, though these languages have nothing akin to the Germanexpression ‘Frauenzimmer.’ [See p. 235 n.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 365Dreams make use of this symbolism for the disguised representation
of their latent thoughts. Incidentally, many of the symbols are habitually
or almost habitually employed to express the same thing. Nevertheless,the peculiar plasticity of the psychical material [in dreams] must never beforgotten. Often enough a symbol has to be interpreted in its propermeaning and not symbolically; while on other occasions a dreamer mayderive from his private memories the power to employ as sexual symbolsall kinds of things which are not ordinarily employed as such.
1If a
dreamer has a choice open to him between a number of symbols, he willdecide in favour of the one which is connected in its subject-matter withthe rest of the material of his thoughts—which, that is to say, has individ-ual grounds for its acceptance in addition to the typical ones. [1909; lastsentence 1914.]
Though the later investigations since the time of Scherner have made
it impossible to dispute the existence of dream-symbolism—even Have-lock Ellis [1911, 109] admits that there can be no doubt that our dreamsare full of symbolism—yet it must be confessed that the presence of sym-bols in dreams not only facilitates their interpretation but also makes itmore difﬁcult. As a rule the technique of interpreting according to thedreamer’s free associations leaves us in the lurch when we come to thesymbolic elements in the dream-content. Regard for scientiﬁc criticismforbids our returning to the arbitrary judgement of the dream-interpreter,as it was employed in ancient times and seems to have been revived in thereckless interpretations of Stekel. We are thus obliged, in dealing withthose elements of the dream-content which must be recognized as sym-bolic, to adopt a combined technique, which on the one hand rests on thedreamer’s associations and on the other hand ﬁlls the gaps from the inter-preter’s knowledge of symbols. We must combine a critical caution in re-solving symbols with a careful study of them in dreams which affordparticularly clear instances of their use, in order to disarm any charge ofarbitrariness in dream-interpretation. The uncertainties which still attachto our activities as interpreters of dreams spring in part from our incom-plete knowledge, which can be progressively improved as we advanced fur-ther, but in part from certain characteristics of dream-symbols themselves.They frequently have more than one or even several meanings, and, as366 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [In the editions of 1909 and 1911 only, the following sentence appeared at
this point: ‘Moreover the ordinarily used sexual symbols are not invariably
unambiguous.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 366with Chinese script, the correct interpretation can only be arrived at on
each occasion from the context. This ambiguity of the symbols links upwith the characteristic of dreams for admitting of ‘over-interpretation’ [seep. 313]—for representing in a single piece of content thoughts and wisheswhich are often widely divergent in their nature. [1914.]
Subject to these qualiﬁcations and reservations I will now proceed. The
Emperor and Empress (or the King and Queen) as a rule really representthe dreamer’s parents; and a Prince or Princess represents the dreamerhimself or herself. [1909.] But the same high authority is attributed togreat men as to the Emperor; and for that reason Goethe, for instance, ap-pears as a father-symbol in some dreams (Hitschmann, 1913.) [1919.]—All elongated objects, such as sticks, tree-trunks and umbrellas (theopening of these last being comparable to an erection) may stand for themale organ [1909]—as well as all long, sharp weapons, such as knives,daggers and pikes [1911]. Another frequent though not entirely intelligi-ble symbol of the same thing is a nail-ﬁle—possibly on account of the rub-bing up and down. [1909.]—Boxes, cases, chests, cupboards and ovensrepresent the uterus [1909], and also hollow objects, ships, and vessels ofall kinds [1919].—Rooms in dreams are usually women (‘ Frauenzimmer’
[see p. 235 n .]); if the various ways in and out of them are represented, this
interpretation is scarcely open to doubt. [1909.]
1In this connection inter-
est in whether the room is open or locked  is easily intelligible. (Cf. Dora’s
ﬁrst dream in my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria,’ 1905 e
[Footnote near the beginning of Section II].) There is no need to name ex-plicitly the key that unlocks the room; in his ballad of Count Eberstein,Uhland has used the symbolism of locks and keys to construct a charmingpiece of bawdry. [1911.]—A dream of going through a suite of rooms is a367 E. Representation by Symbols
1 [Footnote added 1919:] ‘One of my patients, who was living in a boarding-house,
dreamt that he met one of the maidservants and asked her what her number was.
To his surprise she answered: “14”. He had in fact started a liaison with this girland had paid several visits to her in her bedroom. She had not unnaturally beenafraid that the landlady might become suspicious, and, on the day before thedream, she had proposed that they should meet in an unoccupied room. Thisroom was actually “No. 14,” while in the dream it was the woman herself whobore this number. It would hardly be possible to imagine clearer proof of anidentiﬁcation between a woman and a room.’ (Jones, 1914 a.) Cf. Artemidorus,
Oneirocritica , Book II, Chapter X: ‘Thus, for instance, a bedchamber stands for
a wife, if such there be in the house.’ ( Trans . F . S. Krauss, 1881, 110.)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 367brothel or harem dream. [1909.] But, as Sachs [1914] has shown by some
neat examples, it can also be used (by antithesis) to represent marriage.[1914.]—We ﬁnd an interesting link with the sexual researches of child-hood when a dreamer dreams of two rooms which were originally one, orwhen he sees a familiar room divided into two in the dream, or vice versa.In childhood the female genitals and the anus are regarded as a singlearea—the ‘bottom’ (in accordance with the infantile ‘cloaca theory’)
1; and
it is not until later that the discovery is made that this region of the bodycomprises two separate cavities and oriﬁces. [1919.]—Steps, ladders orstaircases, or, as the case may be, walking up or down them, are represen-tations of the sexual act.
2—Smooth walls over which the dreamer climbs,
the façades of houses, down which he lowers himself—often in great anxiety—correspond to erect human bodies, and are probably repeating inthe dream recollections of a baby’s climbing up his parents or nurse. The‘smooth’ walls are men; in his fear the dreamer often clutches hold of ‘pro-jections’ in the façades of houses. [1911.]—Tables, tables laid for a meal,and boards also stand for women—no doubt by antithesis, since the con-tours of their bodies are eliminated in the symbols. [1909.] ‘Wood’ seems,from its linguistic connections, to stand in general for female ‘material.’The name of the Island of ‘Madeira’ means ‘wood’ in Portuguese [1911.]368 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [See the section on ‘Theories of Birth’ in the second of Freud’s Three Essays on
the Theory of Sexuality (1905d ).]
2 [Footnote 1911:] I will repeat here what I have written on this subject elsewhere
(Freud, 1910 d): ‘A little time ago I heard that a psychologist whose views are
somewhat different from ours had remarked to one of us that, when all was said
and done, we did undoubtedly exaggerate the hidden sexual signiﬁcance ofdreams: his own commonest dream was of going upstairs, and surely there couldnot be anything sexual in that. We were put on the alert by this objection, andbegan to turn our attention to the appearance of steps, staircases and ladders indreams, and were soon in a position to show that staircases (and analogousthings) were unquestionably symbols of copulation. It is not hard to discover thebasis of the comparison: we come to the top in a series of rhythmical movementsand with increasing breathlessness and then, with a few rapid leaps, we can getto the bottom again. Thus the rhythmical pattern of copulation is reproducedin going upstairs. Nor must we omit to bring in the evidence of linguistic usage.It shows us that “mounting” [German “ steigen ”] is used as a direct equivalent for
the sexual act. We speak of a man as a “ Steiger ” [a “mounter”] and of “nach-
steigen ” [“to run after,” literally “to climb after”]. In French the steps on a stair-
case are called “ marches” and “un vieux marcheur” has the same meaning as our
“ein alter Steiger” [“an old rake”].’ [Cf. also pp. 302 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 368Since ‘bed and board’ constitute marriage, the latter often takes the place
of the former in dreams and the sexual complex of ideas is, so far as maybe, transposed on to the eating complex. [1909.]—As regards articles ofclothing, a woman’s hat can very often be interpreted with certainty as agenital organ, and, moreover, as a man’s . The same is true of an overcoat
[German ‘Mantel’], though in this case it is not clear to what extent theuse of the symbol is due to a verbal assonance. In men’s dreams a necktieoften appears as a symbol for the penis. No doubt this is not only becauseneckties are long, dependent objects and peculiar to men, but also becausethey can be chosen according to taste—a liberty which, in the case of theobject symbolized, is forbidden by Nature.
1Men who make use of this
symbol in dreams are often very extravagant in ties in real life and ownwhole collections of them. [1911.]—It is highly probable that all compli-cated machinery and apparatus occurring in dreams stand for the genitals(and as a rule male ones [1919])—in describing which dream-symbolismis as indefatigable as the ‘joke-work.’
2[1909.] Nor is there any doubt that
all weapons and tools are used as symbols for the male organ: e.g. ploughs,hammers, riﬂes, revolvers, daggers, sabres, etc. [1919.]—In the same waymany landscapes in dreams, especially any containing bridges or woodedhills, may clearly be recognized as descriptions of the genitals. [1911.]Marcinowski [1912 a] has published a collection of dreams illustrated by
their dreamers with drawings that ostensibly represent landscapes andother localities occurring in the dreams. These drawings bring out veryclearly the distinction between a dream’s manifest and latent meaning.Whereas to the innocent eye they appear as plans, maps, and so on, closerinspection shows that they represent the human body, the genitals, etc.,and only then do the dreams become intelligible. (See in this connectionPﬁster’s papers [1911–12 and 1913] on cryptograms and puzzle-pictures.)369 E. Representation by Symbols
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Compare the drawing made by a nineteen-year-old
manic patient reproduced in Zbl. Psychoanal., 2,675. [Rohrschach, 1912.] It
represents a man with a necktie consisting of a snake which is turning in the di-
rection of a girl. See also the story of ‘The Bashful Man’ in Anthropophyteia , 6,
334: A lady went into a bathroom, and there she came upon a gentleman whoscarcely had time to put on his shirt. He was very much embarrassed, but hur-riedly covering his throat with the front part of his shirt, he exclaimed: ‘Excuseme, but I’ve not got my necktie on.’
2 [See Freud’s volume on jokes (1905 c), in which he introduced the term ‘joke-
work’ (on the analogy of ‘dream-work’) to designate the psychological processesinvolved in the production of jokes.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 369[1914.] In the case of unintelligible neologisms, too, it is worth consider-
ing whether they may not be put together from components with a sexualmeaning. [1911.]—Children in dreams often stand for the genitals; and,indeed, both men and women are in the habit of referring to their genitalsaffectionately as their ‘little ones.’ [1909.] Stekel [1909, 473] is right inrecognizing a ‘little brother’ as the penis. [1925.] Playing with a little child,beating it, etc., often represent masturbation in dreams. [1911.]—To rep-resent castration symbolically, the dream-work makes use of baldness, hair-cutting, falling out of teeth and decapitation. If one of the ordinarysymbols for a penis occurs in a dream doubled or multiplied, it is to be regarded as a warding-off of castration.
1The appearance in dreams of
lizards—animals whose tails grow again if they are pulled off—has thesame signiﬁcance. (Cf. the lizard-dream on pp. 45 f.)—Many of the beastswhich are used as genital symbols in mythology and folklore play the samepart in dreams: e.g. ﬁshes, snails, cats, mice (on account of the pubic hair),and above all those most important symbols of the male organ—snakes.Small animals and vermin represent small children—for instance, unde-sired brothers and sisters. Being plagued with vermin is often a sign ofpregnancy. [1919.]—A quite recent symbol of the male organ in dreamsdeserves mention: the air-ship, whose use in this sense is justiﬁed by itsconnection with ﬂying as well as sometimes by its shape. [1911.]
A number of other symbols have been put forward, with supporting in-
stances, by Stekel, but have not yet been sufﬁciently veriﬁed. [1911.]Stekel’s writings, and in particular his Die Sprache des Traumes [1911], con-
tain the fullest collection of interpretations of symbols. Many of these showpenetration, and further examination has proved them correct: for instance,his section on the symbolism of death. But this author’s lack of a criticalfaculty and his tendency to generalization at all costs throw doubts uponother of his interpretations or render them unusable; so that it is highly ad-visable to exercise caution in accepting his conclusions. I therefore contentmyself with drawing attention to only a few of his ﬁndings. [1914.]
According to Stekel, ‘right’ and ‘left’ in dreams have an ethical sense.
‘The right-hand path always means the path of righteousness and the left-hand one that of crime. Thus “left” may represent homosexuality, incest orperversion, and “right” may represent marriage, intercourse with a prosti-370 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This point is elaborated in Section II of Freud’s paper on ‘The Uncanny’
(1919h ). See also Freud’s posthumously published paper (written in 1922) on
Medusa’s head (1940c ), and below, p. 421.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 370tute and so on, always looked at from the subject’s individual moral stand-
point.’ (Stekel, 1909, 466 ff.)—Relatives in dreams usually play the part ofgenitals (ibid., 473). I can only conﬁrm this in the case of sons, daughtersand younger sisters
1—that is only so far as they fall into the category of ‘lit-
tle ones.’ On the other hand I have come across undoubted cases in which‘sisters’ symbolized the breasts and ‘brothers’ the larger hemispheres.—Stekel explains failing to catch up with a carriage as regret at a difference inage which cannot be caught up with (ibid., 479).—Luggage that one trav-els with is a load of sin, he says, that weighs one down (loc. cit.). [1911.]But precisely luggage often turns out to be an unmistakable symbol of thedreamer’s own genitals. [1914.] Stekel also assigns ﬁxed symbolic meaningsto numbers, such as often appear in dreams [ibid. 497 ff.]. But these expla-nations seem neither sufﬁciently veriﬁed nor generally valid, though his in-terpretations usually appear plausible in the individual cases. [1911.]
2In
any case the number three has been conﬁrmed from many sides as a sym-bol of the male genitals. [1914.]
3
One of the generalizations put forward by Stekel concerns the double
signiﬁcance of genital symbols. [1914.] ‘Where,’ he asks, ‘is there a symbolwhich—provided that the imagination by any means admits of it—cannotbe employed both in a male and in a female sense?’ [1911, 73.] In any casethe clause in parenthesis removes much of the certainty from this asser-tion, since in fact the imagination does not always admit of it. But I thinkit is worth while remarking that in my experience Stekel’s generalizationcannot be maintained in the face of the greater complexity of the facts. Inaddition to symbols which can stand with equal frequency for the maleand for the female genitals, there are some which designate one of the sexespredominantly or almost exclusively, and yet others which are known only
with a male or a female meaning. For it is a fact that the imagination doesnot admit of long, stiff objects and weapons being used as symbols ofthe female genitals, or of hollow objects, such as chests, cases, boxes, etc.,being used as symbols for the male ones. It is true that the tendency of371 E. Representation by Symbols
1 [And, apparently, younger brothers, see above, p. 370.]
2 [At this point, in the 1911 edition only, the following sentence appeared: ‘In
Wilhelm Stekel’s recently published volume, Die Sprache des Traumes , which ap-
peared too late for me to notice it, there is to be found (1911, 72 f.) a list of the
commonest sexual symbols which is intended to show that all sexual symbolscan be employed bisexually.’]
3 [A discussion of the number nine will be found in Section 3 of Freud (1923 d).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 371dreams and of unconscious phantasies to employ sexual symbols bisexually
betrays an archaic characteristic; for in childhood the distinction betweenthe genitals of the two sexes is unknown and the same kind of genitals areattributed to both of them. [1911.] But it is possible, too, to be misledinto wrongly supposing that a sexual symbol is bisexual, if one forgets thatin some dreams there is a general inversion of sex, so that what is male isrepresented as female and vice versa. Dreams of this kind may, for instance,
express a woman’s wish to be a man. [1925.]
The genitals can also be represented in dreams by other parts of the
body: the male organ by a hand or a foot and the female genital oriﬁce bythe mouth or an ear or even an eye. The secretions of the human body—mucus, tears, urine, semen, etc.—can replace one another in dreams. Thislast assertion of Stekel’s [1911, 49], which is on the whole correct, hasbeen justiﬁably criticized by Reitler (1913b) as requiring some qualiﬁca-tion: what in fact happens is that signiﬁcant secretions, such as semen, arereplaced by indifferent ones. [1919.]
It is to be hoped that these very incomplete hints may serve to encour-
age others to undertake a more painstaking general study of the subject[1909.]
1I myself have attempted to give a more elaborate account of
dream-symbolism in my Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (1916–17 [Lecture X]). [1919.]
I shall now append a few examples of the use of these symbols in
dreams, with the idea of showing how impossible it becomes to arrive atthe interpretation of a dream if one excludes dream-symbolism, and howirresistibly one is driven to accept it in many cases. [1911.] At the sametime, however, I should like to utter an express warning against over- estimating the importance of symbols in dream-interpretation, against re-stricting the work of translating dreams merely to translating symbols andagainst abandoning the technique of making use of the dreamer’s associ-ations. The two techniques of dream-interpretation must be complemen-tary to each other; but both in practice and in theory the ﬁrst placecontinues to be held by the procedure which I began by describing and372 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Footnote added 1911:] However much Scherner’s view of dream-symbolism
may differ from the one developed in these pages, I must insist that he is to be
regarded as the true discoverer of symbolism in dreams, and that the investiga-tions of psycho-analysis have at last brought recognition to his book, publishedas it was so many years ago (in 1861), and for so long regarded as fantastic.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 372which attributes a decisive signiﬁcance to the comments made by the
dreamer, while the translation of symbols, as I have explained it, is also atour disposal as an auxiliary method. [1909.]
i
A Hat as a Symbol of a Man 
(or of Male Genitals) (1911)1
(Extract from the dream of a young woman suffering from agorapho-
bia as a result of fears of seduction.)
‘I was walking in the street in the summer, wearing a straw hat of peculiar
shape; its middle-piece was bent upwards and its side-pieces hung downwards’(the description became hesitant at this point) ‘in such a way that one side
was lower than the other. I was cheerful and in a self-conﬁdent frame of373 E. Representation by Symbols
1 [This dream and the two next ones were ﬁrst published in a paper entitled ‘Ad-
ditional Examples of Dream-Interpretation’ (1911 a). The paper was introduced
by the following paragraphs, which have never been reprinted in German:
‘Some Instances of Dream-Symbols. —Of the many objections that have been
raised against the procedure of psycho-analysis, the strangest, and, perhaps, one
might add, the most ignorant, seems to me to be doubt as to the existence ofsymbolism in dreams and the unconscious. For no one who carries out psycho-analyses can avoid assuming the presence of such symbolism, and the resolutionof dreams by symbols has been practised from the earliest times. On the otherhand, I am ready to admit that the occurrence of these symbols should be sub-ject to particularly strict proof in view of their great multiplicity.
‘In what follows I have put together some examples from my most recent ex-
perience: cases in which a solution by means of a particular symbol strikes me asespecially revealing. By this means a dream acquires a meaning which it couldotherwise never have found; it falls into place in the chain of the dreamer’sthoughts and its interpretation is recognized by the subject himself.
‘On a point of technique I may remark that a dreamer’s associations are apt
to fail precisely in connection with the symbolic elements of dreams. In myrecord of these few selected examples I have tried to draw a sharp line betweenthe work of the patient (or dreamer) himself and my own interventions.’
The paper ended with some shorter examples, which will be found reprinted
in Section F of this chapter (Nos. 2, 3 and 4 on pp. 417 f.). In the original paperthese were introduced as follows:9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 373mind; and, as I passed a group of young ofﬁcers, I thought: “None of you can
do me any harm!”’
Since nothing occurred to her in connection with the hat in the dream,
I said: ‘No doubt the hat was a male genital organ, with its middle-piecesticking up and its two side-pieces hanging down. It may seem strange,perhaps, that a hat should be a man, but you will remember the phrase“Unter die Haube kommen” [“to ﬁnd a husband” (literally “to come under
the cap”)].’ I intentionally gave her no interpretation of the detail aboutthe two side-pieces hanging down unevenly; though it is precisely detailsof this kind that must point the way in determining an interpretation. Iwent on to say that as she had a husband with such ﬁne genitals there wasno need for her to be afraid of the ofﬁcers—no need, that is, for her towish for anything from them, since as a rule she was prevented from goingfor a walk unprotected and unaccompanied owing to her phantasies of be-ing seduced. I had already been able to give her this last explanation of heranxiety on several occasions upon the basis of other material.
The way in which the dreamer reacted to this material was most re-
markable. She withdrew her description of the hat and maintained thatshe had never said that the two side-pieces hung down. I was too certainof what I had heard to be led astray, and stuck to my guns. She was silentfor a while and then found enough courage to ask what was meant by oneof her husband’s testes hanging down lower than the other and whetherit was the same in all men. In this way the remarkable detail of the hatwas explained and the interpretation accepted by her.
At the time my patient told me this dream I had long been familiar
with the hat-symbol. Other, less transparent cases had led me to supposethat a hat can also stand for female genitals.
1374 VI. The Dream-Work
‘Some Rarer Forms of Representation.—I have mentioned “considerations of
representability” as one of the factors that inﬂuence the formation of dreams. In
the process of transforming a thought into a visual image a peculiar faculty is re-vealed by dreamers, and an analyst is rarely equal to following it with his guesses.It will therefore give him real satisfaction if the intuitive perception of thedreamer—the creator of these representations—is able to explain their meaning.’]
1 [Footnote 1911:] Cf. an example of this in Kirchgraber (1912). Stekel (1909,
475) records a dream in which a hat with a feather standing up crooked in themiddle of it symbolized an (impotent) man. [Freud suggested an explanation ofhat symbolism in a later paper (1916c ).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 374ii
A ‘Little One’ as the Genital Organ—
‘Being Run Over’ as a Symbol of 
Sexual Intercourse [1911]
(Another dream of the same agoraphobic patient.)
Her mother sent her little daughter away, so that she had to go by herself.
Then she went in a train with her mother and saw her little one walk straight
on to the rails so that she was bound to be run over. She heard the cracking ofher bones. (This produced an uncomfortable feeling in her but no real horror.)Then she looked round out of the window of the railway-carriage to seewhether the parts could not be seen behind. Then she reproached her motherfor having made the little one go by herself.
Analysis. —It is no easy matter to give a complete interpretation of the
dream. It formed part of a cycle of dreams and can only be fully under-stood if it is taken in connection with the others. There is difﬁculty in ob-taining in sufﬁcient isolation the material necessary for establishing thesymbolism.—In the ﬁrst place, the patient declared that the train journeywas to be interpreted historically, as an allusion to a journey she had takenwhen she was leaving a sanatorium for nervous diseases, with whose direc-tor, needless to say, she had been in love. Her mother had fetched her away,and the doctor had appeared at the station and handed her a bouquet ofﬂowers as a parting present. It had been very awkward that her mothershould have witnessed this tribute. At this point, then, her mother ﬁguredas interfering with her attempts at a love affair; and this had in fact beenthe part played by that severe lady during the patient’s girlhood.—Hernext association related to the sentence: ‘she looked round to see whetherthe parts could not be seen from behind.’ The façade of the dream wouldof course lead one to think of the parts of her little daughter who had beenrun over and mangled. But her association led in quite another direction.She recollected having once seen her father naked in the bathroom frombehind; she went on to talk of the distinctions between the sexes, and laidstress on the fact that a man’s genitals can be seen even from behind but awoman’s cannot. In this connection she herself interpreted ‘the little one’as meaning the genitals and ‘her little one’—she had a four-year-old375 E. Representation by Symbols9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 375daughter—as her own genitals. She reproached her mother with having
 expected her to live as though she had no genitals, and pointed out that thesame reproach was expressed in the opening sentence of the dream: ‘hermother sent her little one away, so that she had to go by herself.’ In herimagination ‘going by herself in the streets’ meant not having a man, nothaving any sexual relations (‘ coire’ in Latin [from which ‘coitus’ is derived]
means literally ‘to go with’)—and she disliked that. Her accounts all wentto show that when she was a girl she had in fact suffered from her mother’sjealousy owing to the preference shown her by her father.
1
The deeper interpretation of this dream was shown by another dream
of the same night, in which the dreamer identiﬁed herself with herbrother. She had actually been a boyish girl, and had often been told thatshe should have been a boy. This identiﬁcation with her brother made itparticularly clear that ‘the little one’ meant a genital organ. Her motherwas threatening him (or her) with castration, which could only have beena punishment for playing with her penis; thus the identiﬁcation alsoproved that she herself had masturbated as a child—a memory which tillthen she had only had as applied to her brother. The information sup-plied by the second dream showed that she must have come to knowabout the male organ at an early age and have afterwards forgotten it.Further, the second dream alluded to the infantile sexual theory accordingto which girls are boys who have been castrated. [Cf. Freud, 1908 c.]
When I suggested to her that she had had this childish belief, she at onceconﬁrmed the fact by telling me that she had heard the anecdote of thelittle boy’s saying to the little girl: ‘Cut off?’ and of the little girl’s reply-ing: ‘No, always been like that.’
Thus the sending away of the little one (of the genital organ) in the
ﬁrst dream was also related to the threat of castration. Her ultimate com-plaint against her mother was for not having given birth to her as a boy.
The fact that ‘being run over’ symbolizes sexual intercourse would not
be obvious from this dream, though it has been conﬁrmed from manyother sources.376 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [In the 1911 edition only, the following sentence was added at this point: ‘Stekel
[1909, 473], basing himself on a very common idiomatic usage, has suggested
that the “little one” is a symbol of the male or female genitals.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 376iii
T he Genitals Represented by Buildings, 
Stairs and Shafts [1911]1
(The dream of a young man inhibited by his father-complex.)
He was going for a walk with his father in a place which must certainly
have been the Prater,2since he saw the rotunda, with a small annex in
front of it to which a captive balloon was attached, though it looked
rather limp. His father asked him what all this was for; he was surprised at
his asking, but explained it to him. Then they came into a courtyard which
had a large sheet of tin laid out in it. His father wanted to pull off a large
piece of it, but ﬁrst looked around to see if anyone was watching. He told himthat he need only tell the foreman and he could take some without any bother.A staircase led down from this yard into a shaft, whose walls were cush-
ioned in some soft material, rather like a leather armchair. At the end of theshaft was a longish platform and then another shaft started. . . .
Analysis .—This dreamer belonged to a type whose therapeutic pros -
pects are not favourable: up to a certain point they offer no resistance atall to analysis, but from then onwards turn out to be almost inaccessible.He interpreted this dream almost unaided. ‘The Rotunda,’ he said, ‘wasmy genitals and the captive balloon in front of it was my penis, whoselimpness I have reason to complain of.’ Going into greater detail, then,we may translate the Rotunda as the bottom (habitually regarded by chil-dren as part of the genitals) and the small annex in front of it as the scro-tum. His father asked him in the dream what all this was, that is, whatwas the purpose and function of the genitals. It seemed plausible to re-verse this situation and turn the dreamer into the questioner. Since he hadin fact never questioned his father in this way, we had to look upon thedream-thought as a wish, or take it as a conditional clause, such as: ‘If Ihad asked my father for sexual enlightenment . . .’ We shall presently ﬁndthe continuation of this thought in another part of the dream.377 E. Representation by Symbols
1 [This dream and its interpretation are reproduced in Freud’s Introductory Lec-
tures (1916–17), Lecture XII, No. 7.]
2 [See footnote, p. 214.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 377The courtyard in which the sheet of tin was spread out is not to be taken
symbolically in the ﬁrst instance. It was derived from the business premises
of the dreamer’s father. For reasons of discretion I have substituted ‘tin’ foranother material in which his father actually dealt: but I have made no otherchange in the wording of the dream. The dreamer had entered his father’sbusiness and had taken violent objection to the somewhat dubious practiceson which the ﬁrm’s earnings in part depended. Consequently the dream-thought I have just interpreted may have continued in this way: ‘(If I hadasked him), he would have deceived me just as he deceives his customers.’As regards the ‘pulling off ’ which served to represent his father’s dishonestyin business, the dreamer himself produced a second explanation—namelythat it stood for masturbating. Not only was I already familiar with this in-terpretation (see p. 362 n. 2 above), but there was something to conﬁrm it
by the fact that the secret nature of masturbation was represented by its re-verse: it might be done openly. Just as we should expect, the masturbatoryactivity was once again displaced on to the dreamer’s father, like the ques-tioning in the ﬁrst scene of the dream. He promptly interpreted the shaft asa vagina, having regard to the soft cushioning of its walls. I added from myown knowledge derived elsewhere that climbing down, like climbing up inother cases, described sexual intercourse in the vagina. (See my remarks [inFreud 1910 d], quoted above, p. 368 n. 2.)
The dreamer himself gave a biographical explanation of the fact that the
ﬁrst shaft was followed by a longish platform and then by another shaft. Hehad practised intercourse for a time but had then given it up on account ofinhibitions, and he now hoped to be able to resume it by the help of thetreatment. The dream became more indistinct, however, towards the end,and it must seem probable to anyone who is familiar with these things thatthe inﬂuence of another topic was already making itself felt in the secondscene of the dream, and was hinted at by the father’s business, by his de-ceitful conduct and by the interpretation of the ﬁrst shaft as a vagina: allthis pointed to a connection with the dreamer’s mother.
1378 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [The following additional paragraph was appended to this dream on its ﬁrst
publication (in Freud, 1911 a): ‘This dream as a whole belongs to the not un-
common class of “biographical” dreams, in which the dreamer gives a survey of
his sexual life in the form of a continuous narrative. (See the example [on pp.361 ff.])—The frequency with which buildings, localities and landscapes are em-ployed as symbolic representations of the body, and in particular (with constantreiteration) of the genitals, would certainly deserve a comprehensive study, illus-trated by numerous examples.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 378iv
T he Male Organ Represented by Persons and the 
Female Organ by a Landscape [1911]
(The dream of an uneducated woman whose husband was a police-
man, reported by B. Dattner.)
‘. . . Then someone broke into the house and she was frightened and called
out for a policeman. But he had quietly gone into a church,1to which a num-
ber of steps2led up, accompanied by two tramps. Behind the church there was
a hill3and above it a thick wood.4The policeman was dressed in a helmet,
brass collar and cloak.5He had a brown beard. The two tramps, who went
along peaceably with the policeman, had sack-like aprons tied round their
middles.6In front of the church a path led up to the hill; on both sides of it
there grew grass and brushwood, which became thicker and thicker and, atthe top of the hill, turned into a regular wood.’
v
Dreams of Castration in Children [1919]
(a) A boy aged three years and ﬁve months, who obviously disliked the
idea of his father’s returning from the front, woke up one morning in a dis-turbed and excited state. He kept on repeating: ‘Why was Daddy carryinghis head on a plate? Last night Daddy was carrying his head on a plate. ’
(b) A student who is now suffering from a severe obsessional neurosis re-
members having repeatedly had the following dream during his sixth year:He went to the hairdresser’s to have his hair cut. A big, severe-looking womancame up to him and cut his head off. He recognized the woman as his mother.379 E. Representation by Symbols
1 ‘Or chapel (= vagina).’
2 ‘Symbol of copulation.’
3 ‘Mons veneris .’
4 ‘Pubic hair.’
5 ‘According to an expert, demons in cloaks and hoods are of a phallic character.’
6 ‘The two halves of the scrotum.’9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 379vi
Urinary Symbolism [1914]
The series of drawings reproduced [on p. 624] were found by Ferenczi
in a Hungarian comic paper called Fidibusz , and he at once saw how well
they could be used to illustrate the theory of dreams. Otto Rank has al-
ready reproduced them in a paper (1912 a, [99]).
The drawings bear the title ‘A French Nurse’s Dream’; but it is only the
last picture, showing the nurse being woken up by the child’s screams, thattells us that the seven previous pictures represent the phases of a dream. Theﬁrst picture depicts the stimulus which should have caused the sleeper towake: the little boy has become aware of a need and is asking for help indealing with it. But in the dream the dreamer, instead of being in the bed-room, is taking the child for a walk. In the second picture she has already ledhim to a street corner where he is micturating—and she can go on sleeping.But the arousal stimulus continues; indeed, it increases. The little boy, ﬁnd-ing he is not being attended to, screams louder and louder. The more impe-riously he insists upon his nurse waking up and helping him, the moreinsistent becomes the dream’s assurance that everything is all right and thatthere is no need for her to wake up. At the same time, the dream translatesthe increasing stimulus into the increasing dimensions of its symbols. Thestream of water produced by the micturating boy becomes mightier andmightier. In the fourth picture it is already large enough to ﬂoat a rowingboat; but there follow a gondola, a sailing-ship and ﬁnally a liner. The in-genious artist has in this way cleverly depicted the struggle between an ob-stinate craving for sleep and an inexhaustible stimulus towards waking.
vii
A Staircase Dream [1911]
(Reported and Interpreted by Otto Rank.)1
‘I have to thank the same colleague to whom I owe the dream with a
dental stimulus [recorded on pp. 399 ff. below] for an equally transparentemission dream:380 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Apparently not published elsewhere.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 380‘“I was running down the staircase [of a block of ﬂats] in pursuit of a little
girl who had done something to me, in order to punish her. At the foot of the
stairs someone (a grown-up woman?) stopped the child for me. I caught holdof her; but I don’t know whether I hit her, for I suddenly found myself on themiddle of the staircase copulating with the child (as it were in the air). It wasnot a real copulation; I was only rubbing my genitals against her externalgenitals, and while I did so I saw them extremely distinctly, as well as herhead, which was turned upwards and sideways. During the sexual act I sawhanging above me to my left (also as it were in the air) two small paintings—landscapes representing a house surrounded by trees. At the bottom of thesmaller of these, instead of the painter’s signature, I saw my own ﬁrst name,as though it were intended as a birthday present for me. Then I saw a labelin front of the two pictures, which said that cheaper pictures were also to behad. (I then saw myself very indistinctly as though I were lying in bed on thelanding) and I was woken up by the feeling of wetness caused by the emissionI had had.”
‘Interpretation.—On the evening of the dream-day the dreamer
had been in a bookshop, and as he was waiting to be attended to he hadlooked at some pictures which were on view there and which representedsubjects similar to those in the dream. He went up close to one small pic-ture which had particularly pleased him, to look at the artist’s name—butit had been quite unknown to him.
‘Later the same evening, when he was with some friends, he had heard
a story of a Bohemian servant-girl who boasted that her illegitimate childhad been “made on the stairs.” The dreamer had enquired the details ofthis rather unusual event and had learnt that the servant-girl had gonehome with her admirer to her parents’ house, where there had been noopportunity for sexual intercourse, and in his excitement the man hadcopulated with her on the stairs. The dreamer had made a joking allusionto a malicious expression used to describe adulterated wines, and had saidthat in fact the child came of a “cellar-stair vintage.”
‘So much for the connections with the previous day, which appeared
with some insistence in the dream-content and were reproduced by thedreamer without any difﬁculty. But he brought up no less easily an oldfragment of infantile recollection which had also found its use in thedream. The staircase belonged to the house where he had spent the greaterpart of his childhood and, in particular, where he had ﬁrst made consciousacquaintance with the problems of sex. He had frequently played on thisstaircase and, among other things, used to slide down the banisters, riding381 E. Representation by Symbols9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 381astride on them—which had given him sexual feelings. In the dream, too,
he rushed down the stairs extraordinarily fast—so fast, indeed, that, ac-cording to his own speciﬁc account, he did not put his feet down on theseparate steps but “ﬂew” down them, as people say. If the infantile experi-ence is taken into account, the beginning part of the dream seems to rep-resent the factor of sexual excitement.—But the dreamer had also oftenromped in a sexual way with the neighbours’ children on this same stair-case and in the adjacent building, and had satisﬁed his desires in just thesame way as he did in the dream.
‘If we bear in mind that Freud’s researches into sexual symbolism
(1910d [see above, p. 368 n.]) have shown that stairs and going upstairs
in dreams almost invariably stand for copulation, the dream becomesquite transparent. Its motive force, as indeed was shown by its outcome—an emission—was of a purely libidinal nature. The dreamer’s sexual ex-citement was awakened during his sleep—this being represented in thedream by his rushing down the stairs. The sadistic element in the sexualexcitement, based on the romping in childhood, was indicated by thepursuit and overpowering of the child. The libidinal excitement increasedand pressed towards sexual action—represented in the dream by hiscatching hold of the child and conveying it to the middle of the staircase.Up to that point the dream was only symbolically sexual and would have
been quite unintelligible to any inexperienced dream-interpreter. Butsymbolic satisfaction of that kind was not enough to guarantee a restfulsleep, in view of the strength of the libidinal excitation. The excitation ledto an orgasm and thus revealed the fact that the whole staircase- symbolism represented copulation.—The present dream offers a speciallyclear conﬁrmation of Freud’s view that one of the reasons for the use ofgoing upstairs as a sexual symbol is the rhythmical character of both ac-tivities: for the dreamer expressly stated that the most clearly deﬁned ele-ment in the whole dream was the rhythm of the sexual act and its up anddown motion.
‘I must add a word with regard to the two pictures which, apart from
their real meaning, also ﬁgured in a symbolic sense as “Weibsbilder.”
1This
was shown at once by there being a large picture and a small picture, justas a large (or grown-up) girl and a small one appeared in the dream. Thefact that “cheaper pictures were also to be had” led to the prostitute-382 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Literally ‘pictures of women’—a common German idiom for ‘women.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 382 complex; while on the other hand the appearance of the dreamer’s ﬁrst
name on the small picture and the idea of its being intended as a birthdaypresent for him were hints at the parental complex. (“Born on the stairs”= “begotten by copulation.”)
‘The indistinct ﬁnal scene, in which the dreamer saw himself lying in
bed on the landing and had a feeling of wetness, seems to have pointed theway beyond infantile masturbation still further back into childhood andto have had its prototype in similarly pleasurable scenes of bed-wetting.’
viii
A Modified Staircase Dream [1911]
One of my patients, a man whose sexual abstinence was imposed on
him by a severe neurosis, and whose [unconscious] phantasies were ﬁxedupon his mother, had repeated dreams of going upstairs in her company.I once remarked to him that a moderate amount of masturbation wouldprobably do him less harm than his compulsive self-restraint, and thisprovoked the following dream:
His piano-teacher reproached him for neglecting his piano-playing, and
for not practising Mocheles’ ‘Etudes’ and Clementi’s ‘Gradus ad Parnassum.’
By way of comment, he pointed out that ‘ Gradus’ are also ‘steps’; and
that the key-board itself is a staircase, since it contains scales [ladders].
It is fair to say that there is no group of ideas that is incapable of rep-
resenting sexual facts and wishes.
ix
T he Feeling of Reality and the 
Representation of Repetition [1919]
A man who is now thirty-ﬁve years old reported a dream which he re-
membered clearly and claimed to have had at the age of four. The lawyerwho had charge of his father’s will—he had lost his father when he wasthree— brought two large pears . He was given one of them to eat; the other
lay on the window-sill in the sitting-room . He awoke with a conviction of
the reality of what he had dreamt and kept obstinately asking his mother383 E. Representation by Symbols9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 383for the second pear, and insisted that it was on the window-sill. His
mother had laughed at this.
Analysis.—The lawyer was a jovial old gentleman who, the dreamer
seemed to remember, had really once brought some pears along. Thewindow-sill was as he had seen it in the dream. Nothing else occurred tohim in connection with it—only that his mother had told him a dreamshortly before. She had had two birds sitting on her head and had askedherself when they would ﬂy away; they did not ﬂy away; but one of themﬂew to her mouth and sucked at it.
The failure of the dreamer’s associations gave us a right to attempt an
interpretation by symbolic substitution. The two pears—‘ pommes ou
poires’—were his mother’s breasts which had given him nourishment; thewindow-sill was the projection formed by her bosom—like balconies indreams of houses (see p. 368). His feeling of reality after waking was jus-tiﬁed, for his mother had really suckled him, and had done so, in fact, forfar longer than the usual time and his mother’s breast was still availableto him.
1The dream must be translated: ‘Give (or show) me your breast
again, Mother, that I used to drink from in the past.’ ‘In the past’ was rep-resented by his eating one of the pears; ‘again’ was represented by hislonging for the other. The temporal repetition of an act is regularly shown
in dreams by the numerical multiplication of an object.
It is most remarkable, of course, that symbolism should already be
playing a part in the dream of a four-year-old child. But this is the ruleand not the exception. It may safely be asserted that dreamers have sym-bolism at their disposal from the very ﬁrst.
The following uninﬂuenced recollection by a lady who is now twenty-
seven shows at what an early age symbolism is employed outside dream-life as well as inside it. She was between three and four years old. Hernurse-maid took her to the lavatory along with a brother eleven months herjunior and a girl cousin of an age between the other two, to do their smallbusiness before going out for a walk. Being the eldest, she sat on the seat, whilethe other two sat on chambers. She asked her cousin: ‘Have you got a pursetoo? Walter’s got a little sausage; I’ve got a purse.’ Her cousin replied: ‘Yes, I’ve384 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Cf. p. 210. This point—the fact that a specially strong feeling after waking of
the reality of the dream or of some part of it actually relates to the latent dream-
thoughts—is insisted upon by Freud in a passage towards the end of Chapter IIof his study on Jensen’s Gradiva (1907a) and in the course of his ﬁrst comments
on the ‘Wolf Man’s’ dream (Section IV of Freud, 1918 b).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 384got a purse too.’ The nursemaid heard what they said with much amusement
and reported the conversation to the children’s mother, who reacted with asharp reprimand.
I will here interpolate a dream (recorded in a paper by Alfred Robitsek,
1912), in which the beautifully chosen symbolism made an interpretationpossible with only slight assistance from the dreamer.
x
‘T he Question of Symbolism in the 
Dreams of Normal Persons’ [1914]
‘One objection which is frequently brought forward by opponents of
psycho-analysis, and which has lately been voiced by Havelock Ellis(1911, 168), argues that though dream-symbolism may perhaps occur asa product of the neurotic mind, it is not to be found in normal persons.Now psycho-analytic research ﬁnds no fundamental, but only quantita-tive, distinctions between normal and neurotic life; and indeed the analy-sis of dreams, in which repressed complexes are operative alike in thehealthy and the sick, shows a complete identity both in their mechanismsand in their symbolism. The naïve dreams of healthy people actually of-ten contain a much simpler, more perspicuous and more characteristicsymbolism than those of neurotics; for in the latter, as a result of the morepowerful workings of the censorship and of the consequently more far-reaching dream-distortion, the symbolism may be obscure and hard to in-terpret. The dream recorded below will serve to illustrate this fact. It wasdreamt by a girl who is not neurotic but is of a somewhat prudish and re-served character. In the course of conversation with her I learnt that shewas engaged, but that there were some difﬁculties in the way of her mar-riage which were likely to lead to its postponement. Of her own accordshe told me the following dream.
‘“I arrange the centre of a table with ﬂowers for a birthday.”
1In reply to a
question she told me that in the dream she seemed to be in her own home(where she was not at present living) and had “a feeling of happiness.”385 E. Representation by Symbols
1 [In the present analysis all the material printed in italics occurs in English in the
original, exactly as here reproduced.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 385‘“Popular” symbolism made it possible for me to translate the dream
unaided. It was an expression of her bridal wishes: the table with its ﬂoral
centre-piece symbolized herself and her genitals; she represented herwishes for the future as fulﬁlled, for her thoughts were already occupiedwith the birth of a baby; so her marriage lay a long way behind her.
‘I pointed out to her that “ the ‘centre’ of a table ” was an unusual ex-
pression (which she admitted), but I could not of course question her fur-ther directly on that point. I carefully avoided suggesting the meaning ofthe symbols to her, and merely asked her what came into her head in con-nection with the separate parts of the dream. In the course of the analysisher reserve gave place to an evident interest in the interpretation and toan openness made possible by the seriousness of the conversation.
‘When I asked what ﬂowers they had been, her ﬁrst reply was: “ expen-
sive ﬂowers; one has to pay for them ,” and then that they had been “ lilies of
the valley, violets and pinks or carnations.” I assumed that the word “lily”appeared in the dream in its popular sense as a symbol of chastity; sheconﬁrmed this assumption, for her association to “lily” was “ purity .” “Val-
ley” is a frequent female symbol in dreams; so that the chance combina-
tion of the two symbols in the English name of the ﬂower was used in thedream-symbolism to stress the preciousness of her virginity—“ expensive
ﬂowers, one has to pay for them ”—and to express her expectation that her
husband would know how to appreciate its value. The phrase “expensiveﬂowers,” etc., as will be seen, had a different meaning in the case of eachof the three ﬂower-symbols.
‘“Violets ” was ostensibly quite asexual; but, very boldly, as it seemed to
me, I thought I could trace a secret meaning for the word in an uncon-scious link with the French word “ viol” [“rape”]. To my surprise the
dreamer gave as an association the English word “violate.” The dream hadmade use of the great chance similarity between the words “ violet” and
 “violate ”—the difference in their pronunciation lies merely in the different
stress upon their ﬁnal syllables—in order to express “in the language ofﬂowers” the dreamer’s thoughts on the violence of deﬂoration (anotherterm that employs ﬂower symbolism) and possibly also a masochistic traitin her character. A pretty instance of the “verbal bridges” [see p. 355 n.]crossed by the paths leading to the unconscious. The words “ one has to pay
for them” signiﬁed having to pay with her life for being a wife and a mother.
‘In connection with “pinks,” which she went on to call “ carnations ,” I
thought of the connection between that word and “carnal.” But thedreamer’s association to it was “colour.” She added that “ carnations ” were386 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 386the ﬂowers which her ﬁancé ” gave her frequently and in great numbers. At
the end of her remarks she suddenly confessed of her own accord that she
had not told the truth: what had occurred to her had not been “ colour” but
“incarnation ”—the word I had expected. Incidentally “ colour” itself was
not a very remote association, but was determined by the meaning of “ car-
nation” (ﬂesh-colour)—was determined, that is, by the same complex.This lack of straightforwardness showed that it was at this point that resis-tance was greatest, and corresponded to the fact that this was where thesymbolism was most clear and that the struggle between libido and its re-pression was at its most intense in relation to this phallic theme. Thedreamer’s comment to the effect that her ﬁancé frequently gave her ﬂowers
of that kind was an indication not only of the double sense of the word“carnations ” but also of their phallic meaning in the dream. The gift of
ﬂowers, an exciting factor of the dream derived from her current life, wasused to express an exchange of sexual gifts: she was making a gift of hervirginity and expected a full emotional and sexual life in return for it. Atthis point, too, the words “expensive ﬂowers, one has to pay for them ” must
have had what was no doubt literally a ﬁnancial meaning.—Thus theﬂower symbolism in this dream included virginal feminity, masculinityand an allusion to deﬂoration by violence. It is worth pointing out in thisconnection that sexual ﬂower symbolism, which, indeed, occurs very com-monly in other connections, symbolizes the human organs of sex by blos-soms, which are the sexual organs of plants. It may perhaps be true ingeneral that gifts of ﬂowers between lovers have this unconscious meaning.
‘The birthday for which she was preparing in the dream meant, no
doubt, the birth of a baby. She was identifying herself with her ﬁancé, andwas representing him as “arranging” her for a birth—that is, as copulatingwith her. The latent thought may have run: “If I were he, I wouldn’twait—I would deﬂower my ﬁancée without asking her leave—I would use
violence.” This was indicated by the word “ violate ,” and in this way the
sadistic component of the libido found expression.
‘In a deeper layer of the dream, the phrase “ I arrange . . .” must no
doubt have an auto-erotic, that is to say, an infantile, signiﬁcance.
‘The dreamer also revealed an awareness, which was only possible to
her in a dream, of her physical deﬁciency: she saw herself like a table,without projections, and on that account laid all the more emphasis onthe preciousness of the “ centre”—on another occasion she used the words,
“a centre-piece of ﬂowers ”—that is to say, on her virginity. The horizontal
attribute of a table must also have contributed something to the symbol.387 E. Representation by Symbols9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 387‘The concentration of the dream should be observed: there was noth-
ing superﬂuous in it, every word was a symbol.
‘Later on the dreamer produced an addendum to the dream: “ I deco-
rate the ﬂowers with green crinkled paper.” She added that it was “ fancy pa-
per” of the sort used for covering common ﬂowerpots. She went on: “ to
hide untidy things, whatever was to be seen, which was not pretty to the eye;
there is a gap, a little space in the ﬂowers. The paper looks like velvet ormoss.”—To “decorate ” she gave the association “ decorum,” as I had ex-
pected. She said the green colour predominated, and her association to itwas “hope ”—another link with pregnancy.—In this part of the dream the
chief factor was not identiﬁcation with a man; ideas of shame and self-revelation came to the fore. She was making herself beautiful for him andwas admitting physical defects which she felt ashamed of and was tryingto correct. Her associations “velvet ” and “moss ” were a clear indication of
a reference to pubic hair.
‘This dream, then, gave expression to thoughts of which the girl was
scarcely aware in her waking life—thoughts concerned with sensual loveand its organs. She was being “arranged for a birthday”—that is, she wasbeing copulated with. The fear of being deﬂowered was ﬁnding expres-sion, and perhaps, too, ideas of pleasurable suffering. She admitted herphysical deﬁciencies to herself and overcompensated for them by an over-valuation of her virginity. Her shame put forward as an excuse for thesigns of sensuality the fact that its purpose was the production of a baby.Material considerations, too, alien to a lover’s mind, found their way toexpression. The affect attaching to this simple dream—a feeling of happiness—indicated that powerful emotional complexes had found sat-isfaction in it.’
Ferenczi (1917)
1has justly pointed out that the meaning of symbols and
the signiﬁcance of dreams can be arrived at with particular ease from thedreams of precisely those people who are uninitiated into psycho-analysis.
At this point I shall interpose a dream dreamt by a contemporary his-
torical ﬁgure. I am doing so because in it an object that would in any caseappropriately represent a male organ has a further attribute which estab-lished it in the clearest fashion as a phallic symbol. The fact of a ridingwhip growing to an endless length could scarcely be taken to mean any-388 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This paragraph was added in 1919.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 388thing but an erection. Apart from this, too, the dream is an excellent in-
stance of the way in which thoughts of a serious kind, far removed fromanything sexual, can come to be represented by infantile sexual material.
xi
A Dream of Bismarck’s [1919]1
In his Gedanken und Erinnerungen [1898, 2,194; English translation
by A. J. Butler, Bismarck, the Man and the Statesman , 1898, 2, 209 f.] Bis-
marck quotes a letter written by him to the Emperor William I on De-cember 18th, 1881, in the course of which the following passage occurs:“Your Majesty’s communication encourages me to relate a dream whichI had in the Spring of 1863, in the hardest days of the Conﬂict, fromwhich no human eye could see any possible way out. I dreamt (as I re-lated the ﬁrst thing next morning to my wife and other witnesses) that Iwas riding on a narrow Alpine path, precipice on the right, rocks on theleft. The path grew narrower, so that the horse refused to proceed, and itwas impossible to turn round or dismount, owing to lack of space. Then,with my whip in my left hand, I struck the smooth rock and called onGod. The whip grew to an endless length, the rocky wall dropped like apiece of stage scenery and opened out a broad path, with a view over hillsand forests, like a landscape in Bohemia; there were Prussian troops withbanners, and even in my dream the thought came to me at once that Imust report it to your Majesty. This dream was fulﬁlled, and I woke uprejoiced and strengthened. . . .”’
‘The action of this dream falls into two sections. In the ﬁrst part the
dreamer found himself in an impasse from which he was miraculously res-
cued in the second part. The difﬁcult situation in which the horse and itsrider were placed is an easily recognizable dream-picture of the statesman’scritical position, which he may have felt with particular bitterness as hethought over the problems of his policy on the evening before the dream.In the passage quoted above Bismarck himself uses the same simile [ofthere being no possible “way out”] in describing the hopelessness of hisposition at the time. The meaning of the dream-picture must therefore389 E. Representation by Symbols
1 From a paper by Hanns Sachs [1913.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 389have been quite obvious to him. We are at the same time presented with a
ﬁne example of Silberer’s “functional phenomenon” [cf. pp. 507 ff.]. Theprocess taking place in the dreamer’s mind—each of the solutions at-tempted by his thoughts being met in turn by insuperable obstacles, whilenevertheless he could not and might not tear himself free from the consid-eration of those problems—were most appropriately depicted by the riderwho could neither advance nor retreat. His pride, which forbade his think-ing of surrendering or resigning, was expressed in the dream by the words“it was impossible to turn round or dismount.” In his quality of a man ofaction who exerted himself unceasingly and toiled for the good of others,Bismarck must have found it easy to liken himself to a horse; and in facthe did so on many occasions, for instance, in his well-known saying: “Agood horse dies in harness.” In this sense the words “the horse refused toproceed” meant nothing more nor less than that the over-tired statesmanfelt a need to turn away from the cares of the immediate present, or, to putit another way, that he was in the act of freeing himself from the bonds ofthe reality principle by sleeping and dreaming. The wish-fulﬁlment whichbecame so prominent in the second part of the dream, was already hintedat in the words “Alpine path.” No doubt Bismarck already knew at thattime that he was going to spend his next vacation in the Alps—at Gastein;thus the dream, by conveying him thither, set him free at one blow fromall the burdens of State business.
‘In the second part of the dream, the dreamer’s wishes were represented
as fulﬁlled in two ways: undisguisedly and obviously, and, in addition,symbolically. Their fulﬁlment was represented symbolically by the disap-pearance of the obstructive rock and the appearance in its place of a broadpath—the “way out,” which he was in search of, in its most convenientform; and, it was represented undisguisedly in the picture of the advancingPrussian troops. In order to explain this prophetic vision there is no needwhatever for constructing mystical hypotheses; Freud’s theory of wish- fulﬁlment fully sufﬁces. Already at the time of this dream Bismarck desireda victorious war against Austria as the best escape from Prussia’s internalconﬂicts. Thus the dream was representing this wish as fulﬁlled, just as ispostulated by Freud, when the dreamer saw the Prussian troops with theirbanners in Bohemia, that is, in enemy country. The only peculiarity of thecase was that the dreamer with whom we are here concerned was not con-tent with the fulﬁlment of his wish in a dream but knew how to achieve itin reality . One feature which cannot fail to strike anyone familiar with the390 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 390psycho-analytic technique of interpretation is the riding whip—which grew
to an “endless length.” Whips, sticks, lances and similar objects are famil-iar to us as phallic symbols; but when a whip further possesses the moststriking characteristic of a phallus, its extensibility, scarcely a doubt can re-main. The exaggeration of the phenomenon, its growing to an “endlesslength,” seems to hint at a hypercathexis
1from infantile sources. The fact
that the dreamer took the whip in his hand was a clear allusion to mas -turbation, though the reference was not, of course, to the dreamer’s con-temporary circumstances but to childish desires in the remote past. Theinterpretation discovered by Dr. Stekel [1909, 466 ff.] that in dreams“left” stands for what is wrong, forbidden and sinful is much to the pointhere, for it might very well be applied to masturbation carried out in child-hood in the face of prohibition. Between this deepest infantile stratum andthe most superﬁcial one, which was concerned with the statesman’s imme-diate plans, it is possible to detect an intermediate layer which was relatedto both the others. The whole episode of a miraculous liberation fromneed by striking a rock and at the same time calling on God as a helperbears a remarkable resemblance to the Biblical scene in which Mosesstruck water from a rock for the thirsting Children of Israel. We may un-hesitatingly assume that this passage was familiar in all its details to Bis-marck, who came of a Bible-loving Protestant family. It would not beunlikely that in this time of conﬂict Bismarck should compare himselfwith Moses, the leader, whom the people he sought to free rewarded withrebellion, hatred and ingratitude. Here, then, we should have the connec-tion with the dreamer’s contemporary wishes. But on the other hand theBible passage contains some details which apply well to a masturbationphantasy. Moses seized the rod in the face of God’s command and theLord punished him for this transgression by telling him that he must diewithout entering the Promised Land. The prohibited seizing of the rod (inthe dream an unmistakably phallic one), the production of ﬂuid from itsblow, the threat of death—in these we ﬁnd all the principal factors of in-fantile masturbation united. We may observe with interest the process ofrevision which has welded together these two heterogeneous pictures (orig-inating, the one from the mind of a statesman of genius, and the other391 E. Representation by Symbols
1 [Sachs seems to be using the word simply to mean an ‘additional cathexis’ and
not in the special sense in which Freud uses it below on pp. 590 f., 599, and 611.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 391from the impulses of the primitive mind of a child) and which has by that
means succeeded in eliminating all the distressing factors. The fact thatseizing the rod was a forbidden and rebellious act was no longer indicatedexcept symbolically by the “left” hand which performed it. On the otherhand, God was called on in the manifest content of the dream as thoughto deny as ostentatiously as possible any thought of a prohibition or secret.Of the two prophecies made by God to Moses—that he should see thePromised Land but that he should not enter it—the ﬁrst is clearly repre-sented as fulﬁlled (“the view over hills and forests”), while the second,highly distressing one was not mentioned at all. The water was probablysacriﬁced to the requirements of secondary revision [cf. pp. 493 ff.], whichsuccessfully endeavoured to make this scene and the former one into a sin-gle unity; instead of water, the rock itself fell.
‘We should expect that at the end of an infantile masturbation phan-
tasy, which included the theme of prohibition, the child would wish thatthe people in authority in his environment should learn nothing of whathad happened. In the dream this wish was represented by its opposite, awish to report to the King immediately what had happened. But this re-versal ﬁtted in excellently and quite unobtrusively into the phantasy ofvictory contained in the superﬁcial layer of dream-thoughts and in a por-tion of the manifest content of the dream. A dream such as this of victoryand conquest is often a cover for a wish to succeed in an erotic conquest;
certain features of the dream, such as, for instance, that an obstacle wasset in the way of the dreamer’s advance but that after he had made use ofthe extensible whip a broad path opened out, might point in that direc-tion, but they afford an insufﬁcient basis for inferring that a deﬁnite trendof thoughts and wishes of that kind ran through the dream. We have herea perfect example of completely successful dream-distortion. Whateverwas obnoxious in it was worked over so that it never emerged through thesurface layer that was spread over it as a protective covering. In conse-quence of this it was possible to avoid any release of anxiety. The dreamwas an ideal case of a wish successfully fulﬁlled without infringing thecensorship; so that we may well believe that the dreamer awoke from it“rejoiced and strengthened.”’
As a last example, here is392 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 392xii
A Chemist’s Dream [1909]
This was dreamt by a young man who was endeavouring to give up his
habit of masturbating in favour of sexual relations with women.
Preamble .—On the day before he had the dream he had been in-
structing a student on the subject of Grignard’s reaction, in which magne-
sium is dissolved in absolutely pure ether through the catalytic action ofiodine. T wo days earlier, when the same reaction was being carried out, anexplosion had occurred which had burnt the hand of one of the workers.
Dream. —(I) He was supposed to be making phenyl-magnesium-bromide.
He saw the apparatus with particular distinctness, but had substituted himselffor the magnesium. He now found himself in a singularly unstable state. Hekept on saying to himself: ‘This is all right, things are working, my feet are be-ginning to dissolve already, my knees are getting soft.’ Then he put out hishands and felt his feet. Meanwhile (how, he could not tell) he pulled his legsout of the vessel and said to himself once more: ‘This can’t be right. Yes it is,though.’ At this point he partly woke up and went through the dream to him-self, so as to be able to report it to me. He was positively frightened of the so-lution
1of the dream. He felt very much excited during this period of
semi-sleep and kept repeating: ‘Phenyl, phenyl.’
(II) He was at ——ing with his whole family and was due to be at the
Schottentor2at half-past eleven to meet a particular lady. But he only woke
at half-past eleven, and said to himself: ‘It’s too late. You can’t get there beforehalf-past twelve.’ The next moment he saw the whole family sitting roundthe table; he saw his mother particularly clearly and the maidservant carryingthe soup-tureen. So he thought: ‘Well, as we’ve started dinner, it’s too late forme to go out.’
Analysis. —He had no doubt that even the ﬁrst part of the dream had
some connection with the lady whom he was to meet. (He had had thedream during the night before the expected rendez-vous .) He thought the
student to whom he had given the instructions a particularly unpleasant393 E. Representation by Symbols
1 [German ‘ Auﬂösung’ ; also the word used above for ‘dissolving.’]
2 [‘——ing,’ was presumably a suburb of Vienna (see p. 315 f.); the Schottentor
is near the middle of the town.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 393person. He had said to him: ‘That’s not right,’ because the magnesium
showed no signs of being affected. And the student had replied, as thoughhe were quite unconcerned: ‘No, nor it is.’ The student must have stoodfor himself (the patient), who was just as indifferent about the analysis asthe student was about the synthesis. The ‘he’ in the dream who carriedout the operation stood for me. How unpleasant I must think him for be-ing so indifferent about the result!
On the other hand, he (the patient) was the material which was being
used for the analysis (or synthesis). What was in question was the successof the treatment. The reference to his legs in the dream reminded him ofan experience of the previous evening. He had been having a dancing- lesson and had met a lady of whom he had been eager to make a conquest.He clasped her to himself so tightly that on one occasion she gave ascream. As he relaxed his pressure against her legs, he felt her strong re-sponsive pressure against the lower part of his thighs as far down as hisknees—the point mentioned in his dream. So that in this connection itwas the woman who was the magnesium in the retort—things were work-ing at last. He was feminine in relation to me, just as he was masculine inrelation to the woman. If it was working with the lady it was working withhim in the treatment. His feeling himself and the sensations in his kneespointed to masturbation and ﬁtted in with his fatigue on the previousday.—His appointment with the lady had in fact been for half-past eleven.His wish to miss it by oversleeping and to stay with his sexual objects athome (that is, to keep to masturbation) corresponded to his  resistance.
In connection with his repeating the word ‘phenyl,’ he told me that he
had always been very fond of all these radicals ending in ‘-yl,’ because theywere so easy to use: benzyl, acetyl, etc. This explained nothing. But when Isuggested ‘ Schlemihl ’ to him as another radical in the series,
1he laughed
heartily and told me that in the course of the summer he had read a bookby Marcel Prévost in which there was a chapter on ‘ Les exclus de l’amour ’
which in fact included some remarks upon ‘ les Schlémiliés .’ When he read
them he had said to himself: ‘This is just what I’m like.’—If he had missedthe appointment it would have been another example of his ‘Schlemihlness.’
It would seem that the occurrence of sexual symbolism in dreams
has already been experimentally conﬁrmed by some work carried out by394 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [‘Schlemihl,’ which rhymes with the words ending in ‘-yl,’ is a word of Hebrew
origin commonly used in German to mean an unlucky, incompetent person.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 394K. Schrötter, on lines proposed by H. Swoboda. Subjects under deep hyp-
nosis were given suggestions by Schrötter, and these led to the productionof dreams a large part of whose content was determined by the sugges-tions. If he gave a suggestion that the subject should dream of normal orabnormal sexual intercourse, the dream, in obeying the suggestion, wouldmake use of symbols familiar to us from psycho-analysis in place of thesexual material. For instance, when a suggestion was made to a femalesubject that she should dream of having homosexual intercourse with afriend, the friend appeared in the dream carrying a shabby hand-bag witha label stuck on it bearing the words ‘Ladies only.’ The woman whodreamt this was said never to have had any knowledge of symbolism indreams or of their interpretation. Difﬁculties are, however, thrown in theway of our forming an opinion of the value of these interesting experi-ments by the unfortunate circumstance that Dr. Schrötter committed sui-cide soon after making them. The only record of them is to be found ina preliminary communication published in the Zentralblatt für Psycho-
analyse (Schrötter, 1912). [1914.]
Similar ﬁndings were published by Roffenstein in 1923. Some experi-
ments made by Betlheim and Hartmann (1924) were of particular inter-est, since they made no use of hypnosis. These experimenters relatedanecdotes of a coarsely sexual character to patients suffering from Kor-sakoff’s syndrome and observed the distortions which occurred when theanecdotes were reproduced by the patients in these confusional states.They found that the symbols familiar to us from the interpretation ofdreams made their appearance (e.g. going upstairs, stabbing and shootingas symbols of copulation, and knives and cigarettes as symbols of the pe-nis). The authors attached special importance to the appearance of thesymbol of a staircase, for, as they justly observed, ‘no conscious desire todistort could have arrived at a symbol of such a kind.’ [1925.]
It is only now, after we have properly assessed the importance of sym-
bolism in dreams that it becomes possible for us to take up the theme oftypical dreams, which was broken off on p. 293 above. [1914.] I thinkwe are justiﬁed in dividing such dreams roughly into two classes: thosewhich really always have the same meaning, and those which, in spite ofhaving the same or a similar content, must nevertheless be interpreted inthe greatest variety of ways. Among typical dreams of the ﬁrst class Ihave already [pp. 291 ff.] dealt in some detail with examination dreams.[1909.]395 E. Representation by Symbols9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 395Dreams of missing a train deserve to be put alongside examination
dreams on account of the similarity of their affect, and their explanation
shows that we shall be right in doing so. They are dreams of consolationfor another kind of anxiety felt in sleep—the fear of dying. ‘Departing’on a journey is one of the commonest and best authenticated symbols ofdeath. These dreams say in a consoling way: ‘Don’t worry, you won’t die(depart),’ just as examination dreams say soothingly: ‘Don’t be afraid, noharm will come to you this time either.’ The difﬁculty of understandingboth these kinds of dreams is due to the fact that the feeling of anxiety isattached precisely to the expression of consolation. [1911.]
1
The meaning of dreams ‘with a dental stimulus’ [cf. p. 247],2which I
often had to analyse in patients, escaped me for a long time because, tomy surprise, there were invariably too strong resistances against their in-terpretation. Overwhelming evidence left me at last in no doubt that inmales the motive force of these dreams was derived from nothing otherthan the masturbatory desires of the pubertal period. I will analyse twodreams of this kind, one of which is also a ‘ﬂying dream’. They were bothdreamt by the same person, a young man with strong homosexual lean-ings, which were, however, inhibited in real life.
He was attending a performance of ‘Fidelio’ and was sitting in the stalls
at the Opera beside L., a man who was congenial to him and with whomhe would have liked to make friends. Suddenly he flew through the airright across the stalls, put his hand in his mouth and pulled out two of histeeth.
He himself said of the ﬂight that it was as though he was being
‘thrown’ into the air. Since it was a performance of Fidelio , the words:
Wer ein holdes Weib errungen . . .
might have seemed appropriate. But the gaining of even the loveliestwoman was not among the dreamer’s wishes. T wo other lines were more tothe point:396 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [In the 1911 edition only, the following sentence appeared at this point: ‘Death
symbols are dealt with at length in the recently published volume by Stekel
(1911).’]
2 [This and the following six paragraphs date from 1909.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 396Wem der grosse Wurf gelungen,
Eines Freundes Freund zu sein . . .1
The dream in fact contained this ‘great throw,’ which, however, was notonly a wish-fulﬁlment. It also concealed the painful reﬂection that thedreamer had often been unlucky in his attempts at friendship, and hadbeen ‘thrown out.’ It concealed, too, his fear that this misfortune mightbe repeated in relation to the young man by whose side he was enjoyingthe performance of Fidelio. And now followed what the fastidious
dreamer regarded as a shameful confession: that once, after being rejectedby one of his friends, he had masturbated twice in succession in the stateof sensual excitement provoked by his desire.
Here is the second dream: He was being treated by two University pro-
fessors of his acquaintance instead of by me. One of them was doing somethingto his penis. He was afraid of an operation. The other was pushing against hismouth with an iron rod; so that he lost one or two of his teeth. He was tiedup with four silk cloths.
It can scarcely be doubted that his dream had a sexual meaning. The silk
cloths identiﬁed him with a homosexual whom he knew. The dreamer hadnever carried out coitus and had never aimed at having sexual intercoursewith men in real life; and he pictured sexual intercourse on the model ofthe pubertal masturbation with which he had once been familiar.
The many modiﬁcations of the typical dream with a dental stimulus
(dreams, for instance, of a tooth being pulled out by someone else, etc.)are, I think, to be explained in the same way.
2It may, however, puzzle us397 E. Some Further Typical Dreams
1[Wem der grosse Wurf gelungen,
Eines Freundes Freund zu sein,Wer ein holdes Weib errungen. . .
‘He who has won the great throw of becoming the friend of a friend, he who has
gained a lovely woman . . . !’ These are the opening lines of the second stanza ofSchiller’s Hymn to Joy, which was set to music by Beethoven in his Choral Sym-
phony. But the third of these lines (the one ﬁrst quoted above by Freud) is in factalso the opening line of the last section of the ﬁnal Chorus in Beethoven’s operaFidelio —his librettist having apparently plagiarized Schiller.]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] A tooth being pulled out by someone else in a dream is as a
rule to be interpreted as castration (like having one’s hair cut by a barber, according9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 397to discover how ‘dental stimuli’ have come to have this meaning. But I
should like to draw attention to the frequency with which sexual repres-sion makes use of transpositions from a lower to an upper part of thebody.
1Thanks to them it becomes possible in hysteria for all kinds of sen-
sations and intentions to be put into effect, if not where they properly belong—in relation to the genitals, at least in relation to other, unobjec-tionable parts of the body. One instance of a transposition of this kind isthe replacement of the genitals by the face in the symbolism of uncon-scious thinking. Linguistic usage follows the same line in recognizing thebuttocks [‘Hinterbacken ,’ literally ‘back-cheeks’] as homologous to the
cheeks, and by drawing a parallel between the ‘ labia’ and the lips which
frame the aperture of the mouth. Comparisons between nose and penisare common, and the similarity is made more complete by the presenceof hair in both places. The one structure which affords no possibility ofan analogy is the teeth; and it is precisely this combination of similarityand dissimilarity which makes the teeth so appropriate for representa-tional purposes when pressure is being exercised by sexual repression.
I cannot pretend that the interpretation of dreams with a dental stim-
ulus as dreams of masturbation—an interpretation whose correctnessseems to me beyond doubt—has been entirely cleared up.
2I have given
what explanation I can and must leave what remains unsolved. But I maydraw attention to another parallel to be found in linguistic usage. In ourpart of the world the act of masturbation is vulgarly described as ‘ sich
einen ausreissen ’ or ‘ sich einen herunterreissen ’ [literally, ‘pulling one out’
or ‘pulling one down’].
3I know nothing of the source of this terminology
or of the imagery on which it is based; but ‘a tooth’ would ﬁt very wellinto the ﬁrst of the two phrases.398 VI. The Dream-Work
to Stekel). A distinction must in general be made between dreams with a dental
stimulus and dentist dreams, such as those recorded by Coriat (1913).
1 [Instances of this will be found in the case history of ‘Dora’ (Freud, 1905 e). The
comparison which follows had been drawn by Freud in a letter to Fliess of Jan-uary 16, 1899 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 102).]
2 [Footnote added 1909:] A communication by C. G. Jung informs us that dreams
with a dental stimulus occurring in women have the meaning of birth dreams.—[Added 1919:] Ernest Jones [1914b] has brought forward clear conﬁrmation of
this. The element in common between this interpretation and the one put for-ward above lies in the fact that in both cases (castration and birth) what is inquestion is the separation of a part of the body from the whole.
3 [Footnote added 1911:] Cf. the ‘biographical’ dream on p. 362, n. 2.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 398According to popular belief dreams of teeth being pulled out are to be
interpreted as meaning the death of a relative, but psycho-analysis can at
most conﬁrm this interpretation only in the joking sense I have alludedto above. In this connection, however, I will quote a dream with a dentalstimulus that has been put at my disposal by Otto Rank.
1
‘A colleague of mine, who has for some time been taking a lively in-
terest in the problems of dream-interpretation, has sent me the followingcontribution to the subject of dreams with a dental stimulus.
‘“A short time ago I had a dream that I was at the dentist’s and he was
drilling a back tooth in my lower jaw. He worked on it so long that the toothbecame useless. He then seized it with a forceps and pulled it out with an ef-fortless ease that excited my astonishment. He told me not to bother about it,for it was not the tooth that he was really treating, and put it on the table,where the tooth (as it now seemed to me, an upper incisor) fell apart into sev-eral layers. I got up from the dentist’s chair, went closer to it with a feeling ofcuriosity, and raised a medical question which interested me. The dentist ex-plained to me, while he separated out the various portions of the strikinglywhite tooth and crushed them up (pulverized them) with an instrument, thatit was connected with puberty and that it was only before puberty that teethcame out so easily, and that in the case of women the decisive factor was thebirth of a child.
‘“I then became aware (while I was half asleep, I believe) that the
dream had been accompanied by an emission, which I could not attachwith certainty, however, to any particular part of the dream; I was mostinclined to think that it had already occurred while the tooth was beingpulled out.
‘“I then went on to dream of an occurrence which I can no longer re-
call, but which ended with my leaving my hat and coat somewhere (possibly
in the dentist’s cloakroom) in the hope that someone would bring them afterme, and with my hurrying off, dressed only in my overcoat, to catch a trainwhich was starting. I succeeded at the last moment in jumping on to the hind-most carriage where someone was already standing. I was not able, though, tomake my way into the inside of the carriage, but was obliged to travel in anuncomfortable situation from which I tried, successfully in the end, to escape.399 E. Some Further Typical Dreams
1 [This paragraph and the quotation from Rank which follows were ﬁrst included
in 1911. The quotation is from Rank 1911c. Cf. the same dreamer’s staircase
dream on pp. 380 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 399We entered a big tunnel and two trains, going in the opposite direction to us,
passed through our train as if it were the tunnel. I was looking into a carriagewindow as though I were outside.
‘“The following experiences and thoughts from the previous day pro-
vide material for an interpretation of the dream:
‘“(I.) I had in fact been having dental treatment recently, and at the
time of the dream I was having continual pain in the tooth in the lowerjaw which was being drilled in the dream and at which the dentist had,again in reality, worked longer than I liked. On the morning of thedream-day I had once more been to the dentist on account of the pain;and he had suggested to me that I should have another tooth pulled outin the same jaw as the one he had been treating, saying that the painprobably came from this other one. This was a ‘wisdom tooth’ which Iwas cutting just then. I had raised a question touching his medical con-science in that connection.
‘“(II.) On the afternoon of the same day, I had been obliged to apol-
ogize to a lady for the bad temper I was in owing to my toothache; where-upon she had told me she was afraid of having a root pulled out, thecrown of which had crumbled away almost entirely. She thought thatpulling out ‘eye-teeth’ was especially painful and dangerous, although onthe other hand one of her acquaintances had told her that it was easier topull out teeth in the upper jaw, which was where hers was. This acquain-tance had also told her that he had once had the wrong tooth pulled outunder an anaesthetic, and this had increased her dread of the necessaryoperation. She had then asked me whether ‘eye-teeth’ were molars or ca-nines, and what was known about them. I pointed out to her on the onehand the superstitious element in all these opinions, though at the sametime I emphasized the nucleus of truth in certain popular views. She wasthen able to repeat to me what she believed was a very old and wide-spread popular belief—that if a pregnant woman had toothache shewould have a boy.
‘“(III.) This saying interested me in connection with what Freud says
in his Interpretation of Dreams on the typical meaning of dreams with a
dental stimulus as substitutes for masturbation, since in the popular say-ing (quoted by the lady) a tooth and male genitals (or a boy) were alsobrought into relation with each other. On the evening of the same day,therefore, I read through the relevant passage in the Interpretation ofDreams and found there amongst other things the following statements
whose inﬂuence upon my dream may be observed just as clearly as that400 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 400of the other two experiences I have mentioned. Freud writes of dreams
with a dental stimulus that ‘in males the motive force of these dreams wasderived from nothing other than the masturbatory desires of the pubertalperiod’ [p. 396]. And further: ‘The many modiﬁcations of the typicaldream with a dental stimulus (dreams, for instance, of a tooth beingpulled out by someone else, etc.) are, I think, to be explained in the sameway. It may, however, puzzle us to discover how “dental stimuli” shouldhave come to have this meaning. But I should like to draw attention tothe frequency with which sexual repression makes use of transpositionsfrom a lower to an upper part of the body.’ (In the present dream fromthe lower jaw to the upper jaw.) ‘Thanks to them it becomes possible inhysteria for all kinds of sensations and intentions to be put into effect, ifnot where they properly belong—in relation to the genitals, at least in re-lation to other, unobjectionable parts of the body’ [p. 398]. And again:‘But I may draw attention to another parallel to be found in linguistic us-age. In our part of the world the act of masturbation is vulgarly describedas “sich einen ausreissen” or “sich einen herunterreissen ”’ [p. 398]. I was al-
ready familiar with this expression in my early youth as a description ofmasturbation, and no experienced dream-interpreter will have any difﬁ-culty in ﬁnding his way from here to the infantile material underlying thedream. I will only add that the ease with which the tooth in the dream,which after its extraction turned into an upper incisor, came out, re-minded me of an occasion in my childhood on which I myself pulled outa loose upper front tooth easily and without pain. This event, which I canstill remember clearly today in all its details, occurred at the same earlyperiod to which my ﬁrst conscious attempts at masturbation go back.(This was a screen memory.)
‘“Freud’s reference to a statement by C. G. Jung to the effect that
‘dreams with a dental stimulus occurring in women have the meaning ofbirth dreams’ [p. 398 footnote], as well as the popular belief in the signiﬁ-cance of toothache in pregnant women, accounted for the contrast drawnin the dream between the decisive factor in the case of females and ofmales (puberty). In this connection I recall an earlier dream of mine whichI had soon after a visit to the dentist and in which I dreamt that the goldcrowns which had just been ﬁxed fell out; this annoyed me very much inthe dream on account of the considerable expense in which I had been in-volved and which I had not yet quite got over at the time. This otherdream now became intelligible to me (in view of a certain experience ofmine) as a recognition of the material advantages of masturbation over401 E. Some Further Typical Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 401 object-love: the latter, from an economic point of view, was in every re-
spect less desirable (cf. the gold crowns)1; and I believe that the lady’s
 remark about the signiﬁcance of toothache in pregnant women had re-awakened these trains of thought in me.”
‘So much for the interpretation put forward by my colleague, which is
most enlightening and to which, I think, no objections can be raised. Ihave nothing to add to it, except, perhaps, a hint at the probable meaningof the second part of the dream. This seems to have represented thedreamer’s transition from masturbation to sexual intercourse, which wasapparently accomplished with great difﬁculty—(cf. the tunnel throughwhich the trains went in and out in various directions) as well as the dan-ger of the latter (cf. pregnancy and the overcoat [see p. 208 f.]). Thedreamer made use for this purpose of the verbal bridges “ Zahn-ziehen
(Zug)” and “Zahn-reissen (Reisen) .”
2
‘On the other hand, theoretically, the case seems to me interesting in
two respects. In the ﬁrst place, it brings evidence in favour of Freud’s dis-covery that ejaculation in a dream accompanies the act of pulling out atooth. In whatever form the emission may appear, we are obliged to regardit as a masturbatory satisfaction brought about without the assistance ofany mechanical stimulation. Moreover, in this case, the satisfaction accom-panying the emission was not, as it usually is, directed to an object, even ifonly to an imaginary one, but had no object, if one may say so; it wascompletely auto-erotic, or at the most showed a slight trace of homosexu-ality (in reference to the dentist).
‘The second point which seems to me to deserve emphasis is the fol-
lowing. It may plausibly be objected that there is no need at all to regardthe present case as conﬁrming Freud’s view, since the events of the previ-ous day would be sufﬁcient in themselves to make the content of thedream intelligible. The dreamer’s visit to the dentist, his conversation withthe lady and his reading of the Interpretation of Dreams would quite sufﬁ-
ciently explain how he came to produce this dream, especially as his sleepwas disturbed by toothache; they would even explain, if need be, how thedream served to dispose of the pain which was disturbing his sleep—bymeans of the idea of getting rid of the painful tooth and by  simultaneously402 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [The crown ( Krone ) was at this time the Austrian monetary unit.]
2 [‘Zahn-ziehen ’ = ‘to pull out a tooth’; ‘ Zug’ (from the same root as ‘ziehen ’) =
‘train’ or ‘pull.’ ‘Zahn-reissen ’ = ‘to pull out a tooth’; ‘Reisen ’ (pronounced not
much unlike ‘ reissen ’) = ‘to travel.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 402drowning with libido the painful sensation which the dreamer feared. But
even if we make the greatest possible allowance for all this, it cannot be se-riously maintained that the mere reading of Freud’s explanations couldhave established in the dreamer the connection between pulling out atooth and the act of masturbation, or could even have put that connectioninto operation, unless it had been laid down long since, as the dreamerhimself admits it was (in the phrase “ sich einen ausreissen ”). This connec-
tion may have been revived not only by his conversation with the lady butby a circumstance which he reported subsequently. For in reading the In-
terpretation of Dreams he had been unwilling, for comprehensible reasons,
to believe in this typical meaning of dreams with a dental stimulus, andhad felt a desire to know whether that meaning applied to all dreams ofthat sort. The present dream conﬁrmed the fact that this was so, at least asfar as he was concerned, and thus showed him why it was that he had beenobliged to feel doubts on the subject. In this respect too, therefore, thedream was the fulﬁlment of a wish—namely, the wish to convince himselfof the range of application and the validity of this view of Freud’s.’
The second group of typical dreams included those in which the
dreamer ﬂies or ﬂoats in the air, falls, swims, etc. What is the meaning ofsuch dreams? It is impossible to give a general reply. As we shall hear, theymean something different in every instance; it is only the raw material ofsensations contained in them which is always derived from the samesource. [1909.]
The information provided by psycho-analyses forces me to conclude
that these dreams, too, reproduce impressions of childhood; they relate,that is, to games involving movement, which are extraordinarily attractiveto children. There cannot be a single uncle who has not shown a childhow to ﬂy by rushing across the room with him in his outstretched arms,or who has not played at letting him fall by riding him on his knee andthen suddenly stretching out his leg, or by holding him up high and thensuddenly pretending to drop him. Children are delighted by such experi-ences and never tire of asking to have them repeated, especially if there issomething about them that causes a little fright or giddiness. In after yearsthey repeat these experiences in dreams; but in the dreams they leave outthe hands which held them up, so that they ﬂoat or fall unsupported. Thedelight taken by young children in games of this kind (as well as in swingsand see-saws) is well known; when they come to see acrobatic feats in acircus their memory of such games is revived. Hysterical attacks in boys403 E. Some Further Typical Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 403sometimes consist merely in reproductions of feats of this kind, carried
out with great skill. It not uncommonly happens that these games ofmovement, though innocent in themselves, give rise to sexual feelings.Childish romping [‘ Hetzen ’], if I may use a word which commonly de-
scribes all such activities, is what is being repeated in dreams of ﬂying,falling, giddiness and so on; while the pleasurable feelings attached tothese experiences are transformed into anxiety. But, often enough, asevery mother knows, romping among children actually ends in squab-bling and tears. [1900.]
Thus I have good grounds for rejecting the theory that what provokes
dreams of ﬂying and falling is the state of our tactile feelings during sleepor sensations of the movement of our lungs, and so on. In my view thesesensations are themselves reproduced as part of the memory to which thedream goes back: that is to say, they are part of the content of the dream
and not its source. [1900.]
1
This material, then, consisting of sensations of movement of similar
kinds and derived from the same source, is used to represent dream-thoughts of every possible sort. Dreams of ﬂying or ﬂoating in the air (asa rule, pleasurably toned) require the most various interpretations; withsome people these interpretations have to be of an individual character,whereas with others they may even be of a typical kind. One of mywomen patients used very often to dream that she was ﬂoating at a certainheight over the street without touching the ground. She was very short,and she dreaded the contamination involved in contact with otherpeople. Her ﬂoating dream fulﬁlled her two wishes, by raising her feetfrom the ground and lifting her head into a higher stratum of air. In otherwomen I have found that ﬂying dreams expressed a desire ‘to be like abird’; while other dreamers became angels during the night because theyhad not been called angels during the day. The close connection of ﬂyingwith the idea of birds explains how it is that in men ﬂying dreams usuallyhave a grossly sensual meaning;
2and we shall not be surprised when we
hear that some dreamer or other is very proud of his powers of ﬂight.[1909.]404 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Footnote added 1930:] These remarks on dreams of movement are repeated
here, since the present context requires them. See above, pp. 289 f. [where some
additional footnotes will be found.]
2 [See p. 581, n. 4.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 404Dr. Paul Federn (of Vienna [and later of New York]) has put forward1
the attractive theory that a good number of these ﬂying dreams are
dreams of erection; for the remarkable phenomenon of erection, aroundwhich the human imagination has constantly played, cannot fail to beimpressive, involving as it does an apparent suspension of the laws ofgravity. (Cf. in this connection the winged phalli of the ancients.) [1911.]
It is a remarkable fact that Mourly Vold, a sober-minded investigator
of dreams and one who is disinclined to interpretation of any kind, alsosupports the erotic interpretation of ﬂying or ﬂoating dreams (Vold,1910–12, 2,791). He speaks of the erotic factor as ‘the most powerful
motive for ﬂoating dreams,’ draws attention to the intense feeling of vi-bration in the body that accompanies such dreams and points to the fre-quency with which they are connected with erections or emissions.[1914.]
Dreams of falling, on the other hand, are more often characterized by
anxiety. Their interpretation offers no difﬁculty in the case of women,who almost always accept the symbolic use of falling as a way of describ-ing a surrender to an erotic temptation. Nor have we yet exhausted theinfantile sources of dreams of falling. Almost every child has fallen downat one time or other and afterwards been picked up and petted; or if hehas fallen out of his cot at night, has been taken into bed with his motheror nurse. [1909.]
People who have frequent dreams of swimming and who feel great joy
in cleaving their way through the waves, and so on, have as a rule beenbed-wetters and are repeating in their dreams a pleasure which they havelong learnt to forgo. We shall learn presently [pp. 410 ff.] from more thanone example what it is that dreams of swimming are most easily used torepresent. [1909.]
The interpretation of dreams of ﬁre justiﬁes the nursery law which for-
bids a child to ‘play with ﬁre’—so that he shall not wet his bed at night.For in their case, too, there is an underlying recollection of the enuresisof childhood. In my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’[1905e , Part II, Dora’s ﬁrst dream], I have given a complete analysis and
synthesis of a ﬁre-dream of this kind in connection with the dreamer’s405 E. Some Further Typical Dreams
1 [At a meeting of the Vienna Psycho-Analytical Society. See his subsequent paper
on the subject (Federn, 1914, 126).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 405case history, and I have shown what impulses of adult years this infantile
material can be used to represent. [1911.]
It would be possible to mention a whole number of other ‘typical’
dreams if we take the term to mean that the same manifest dream-contentis frequently to be found in the dreams of different dreamers. For instancewe might mention dreams of passing through narrow streets or of walk-ing through whole suites of rooms [cf. p. 235], and dreams of burglars—against whom, incidentally, nervous people take precautions before they
go to sleep [cf. p. 413 f.]. Dreams of being pursued by wild animals (orby bulls or horses) [cf. p. 419] or of being threatened with knives, daggersor lances—these last two classes being characteristic of the manifest con-tent of the dreams of people who suffer from anxiety—and many more.An investigation specially devoted to this material would thoroughly re-pay the labour involved. But instead of this I have two
1observations to
make, though these do not apply exclusively to typical dreams. [1909.]
The more one is concerned with the solution of dreams, the more one
is driven to recognize that the majority of the dreams of adults deal withsexual material and give expression to erotic wishes. A judgement on thispoint can be formed only by those who really analyse dreams, that is to say,who make their way through their manifest content to the latent dream-thoughts, and never by those who are satisﬁed with making a note of themanifest content alone (like Näcke, for instance, in his writings on sexualdreams). Let me say at once that this fact is not in the least surprising butis in complete harmony with the principles of my explanation of dreams.No other instinct has been subjected since childhood to so much suppres-406 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This ‘two’ is a vestige of the 1909 and 1911 editions, in which the whole dis-
cussion on ‘typical’ dreams was contained in Chapter V. The ﬁrst observation,
introduced by a ‘I,’ began with the paragraph which now follows and continuedto the end of the present Section E—to p. 414. The second observation, intro-duced by a ‘II,’ immediately followed; it was the passage beginning on p. 364with the words ‘When we have become familiar’ and continuing to the words‘another example of his “Schlemihlness”’ on p. 394, with which, in those twoeditions, Chapter V ended. In later editions, of course, both these passages havebecome very greatly enlarged by the accretion of fresh material. In the 1909 edi-tion the two observations together only occupied about ﬁve pages, as comparedwith forty-two in 1930.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 406sion as the sexual instinct with its numerous components (cf. my Three
 Essays on the Theory of Sexuality , 1905d ); from no other instinct are so
many and such powerful unconscious wishes left over, ready to produce
dreams in a state of sleep. In interpreting dreams we should never forget thesigniﬁcance of sexual complexes, though we should also, of course, avoidthe exaggeration of attributing exclusive importance to them. [1909.]
We can assert of many dreams, if they are carefully interpreted, that
they are bisexual, since they unquestionably admit of an ‘over- interpretation’in which the dreamer’s homosexual impulses are realized—impulses, thatis, which are contrary to his normal sexual activities. To maintain, how-ever, as do Stekel (1911, [71]) and Adler (1910, etc.), that alldreams are
to be interpreted bisexually appears to me to be a generalization which isequally undemonstrable and unplausible and which I am not prepared tosupport. In particular, I cannot dismiss the obvious fact that there are nu-merous dreams which satisfy needs other than those which are erotic inthe widest sense of the word: dreams of hunger and thirst, dreams of con-venience, etc. So, too, such statements as that ‘the spectre of death is tobe found behind every dream’ (Stekel [1911, 34]), or that ‘every dreamshows an advance from the feminine to the masculine line’ (Adler [1910]),appear to me to go far beyond anything that can be legitimately main-tained in dream-interpretation. [1911.]
The assertion that all dreams require a sexual interpretation, against
which critics rage so incessantly, occurs nowhere in my Interpretation of
Dreams . It is not to be found in any of the numerous editions of this book
and is in obvious contradiction to other views expressed in it. [1919.]
1
I have already shown elsewhere [pp. 206 ff.] that strikingly innocent
dreams may embody crudely erotic wishes, and I could conﬁrm this bymany new instances. But it is also true that many dreams which appearto be indifferent and which one would not regard as in any respect pecu-
liar lead back on analysis to wishful impulses which are unmistakably sex-ual and often of an unexpected sort. Who, for instance, would havesuspected the presence of a sexual wish in the following dream before ithad been interpreted? The dreamer gave this account of it: Standing back
a little behind two stately palaces was a little house with closed doors. My wifeled me along the piece of street up to the little house and pushed the door open;I then slipped quickly and easily into the inside of a court which rose in an407 E. Some Further Typical Dreams
1 [This point is more fully dealt with on p. 194, footnote.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:23 PM  Page 407incline. Anyone, however, who has had a little experience in translating
dreams will at once reﬂect that penetrating into narrow spaces and open-
ing closed doors are among the commonest sexual symbols, and will eas-ily perceive in this dream a representation of an attempt at coitus a tergo
(between the two stately buttocks of the female body). The narrow pas-sage rising in an incline stood, of course, for the vagina. The assistance at-tributed by the dreamer to his wife forces us to conclude that in reality itwas only consideration for her that restrained the dreamer from makingattempts of this kind. It turned out that on the dream-day a girl hadcome to live in the dreamer’s household who had attracted him and hadgiven him the impression that she would raise no great objections to anapproach of that kind. The little house between the two palaces was areminiscence of the Hradshin [Citadel] in Prague and was a further ref-erence to the same girl, who came from that place. [1909.]
When I insist to one of my patients on the frequency of Oedipus
dreams, in which the dreamer has sexual intercourse with his ownmother, he often replies: ‘I have no recollection of having had any suchdream.’ Immediately afterwards, however, a memory will emerge of someother inconspicuous and indifferent dream, which the patient has dreamtrepeatedly. Analysis then shows that this is in fact a dream with the samecontent—once more an Oedipus dream. I can say with certainty that dis-
guised dreams of sexual intercourse with the dreamer’s mother are many
times more frequent than straightforward ones. [1909.]
1408 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Footnote added 1911:] I have published elsewhere a typical example of a dis-
guised Oedipus dream of this kind. [Freud 1910 l; now reprinted at the end of
this footnote.] Another example, with a detailed analysis, has been published by
Otto Rank (1911 a).—[Added 1914:] For some other disguised Oedipus dreams,
in which eye-symbolism is prominent, see Rank (1913). Other papers on eye-dreams and eye-symbolism, by Eder [1913], Ferenczi [1913] and Reitler[1913a ] will be found in the same place. The blinding in the legend of Oedipus,
as well as elsewhere, stands for castration.—[ Added 1911:] Incidentally, the sym-
bolic interpretation of undisguised Oedipus dreams was not unknown to the an-cients. Rank (1910, 534) writes: ‘Thus Julius Caesar is reported to have had adream of sexual intercourse with his mother which was explained by the dream-interpreters as a favourable augury for his taking possession of the earth (MotherEarth). The oracle given to the Tarquins is equally well known, which prophe-sied that the conquest of Rome would fall to that one of them who should ﬁrstkiss his mother (“ osculum matri tulerit ”). This was interpreted by Brutus as re-
ferring to Mother Earth. (“ T erram osculo contigit, scilicet quod ea communis mater9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 408In some dreams of landscapes or other localities emphasis is laid in the
dream itself on a convinced feeling of having been there once before. (Oc-
currences of ‘ déjà vu ’ in dreams have a special meaning.1) These places are409 E. Some Further Typical Dreams
omnium mortalium esset.” [“He kissed the earth, saying it was the common
mother of all mortals.”] Livy, I, 56.)’—[Added 1914:] Compare in this connec-
tion the dream of Hippias reported by Herodotus (VI, 107 [ Trans . 1922, 259]):
‘As for the Persians, they were guided to Marathon by Hippias son of Pisistratus.Hippias in the past night had seen a vision in his sleep wherein he thought thathe lay with his own mother; he interpreted this dream to signify that he shouldreturn to Athens and recover his power, and so die an old man in his ownmother-country.’—[Added 1911:] These myths and interpretations reveal a true
psychological insight. I have found that people who know that they are preferredor favoured by their mother give evidence in their lives of a peculiar self-relianceand an unshakable optimism which often seem like heroic attributes and bringactual success to their possessors.
[This reprint of the short paper by Freud (1910 l) which is mentioned at the be-
ginning of the present footnote was added here in 1925:]
‘T
YPICAL EXAMPLE OF A DISGUISED OEDIPUS DREAM : A man dreamt that he
had a secret liaison with a lady whom someone else wanted to marry. He was worriedin case this other man might discover the liaison and the proposed marriage come tonothing. He therefore behaved in a very affectionate way to the man. He embracedhim and kissed him. —There was only one point of contact between the content
of this dream and the facts of the dreamer’s life. He had a secret liaison with a
married woman; and an ambiguous remark made by her husband, who was afriend of his, led him to suspect that the husband might have noticed some-thing. But in reality there was something else involved, all mention of which wasavoided in the dream but which alone provided a key to its understanding. Thehusband’s life was threatened by an organic illness. His wife was prepared for thepossibility of his dying suddenly, and the dreamer was consciously occupied withan intention to marry the young widow after her husband’s death. This externalsituation placed the dreamer in the constellation of the Oedipus dream. Hiswish was capable of killing the man in order to get the woman as his wife. Thedream expressed this wish in a hypocritically distorted form. Instead of her beingmarried already, he made out that someone else wanted to marry her, which cor-responded to his own secret intentions; and his hostile wishes towards her hus-band were concealed behind demonstrations of affection which were derivedfrom his memory of his relations with his own father in childhood.’ [Hypocrit-ical dreams are discussed on pp. 169 n. and 477 ff.]
1 [This last sentence was interpolated in 1914. The phenomenon of ‘déjà vu’ in
general is discussed by Freud in Chapter XII (D) of his Psychopathology of Every-
day Life (1901b ) and in another short paper (Freud, 1914 a). See also below
p. 454.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 409invariably the genitals of the dreamer’s mother; there is indeed no other
place about which one can assert with such conviction that one has beenthere once before. [1909.]
On one occasion only I was perplexed by an obsessional neurotic who
told me a dream in which he was visiting a house that he had been intwice before. But this particular patient had told me a considerable time
before of an episode during his sixth year. On one occasion he had beensharing his mother’s bed and misused the opportunity by inserting hisﬁnger into her genitals while she was asleep. [1914.]
A large number of dreams,
1often accompanied by anxiety and having
as their content such subjects as passing through narrow spaces or beingin water, are based upon phantasies of intra-uterine life, of existence inthe womb and of the act of birth. What follows was the dream of a youngman who, in his imagination, had taken advantage of an intra-uterine op-portunity of watching his parents copulating.
He was in a deep pit with a window in it like the one in the Semmering
Tunnel.
2At ﬁrst he saw an empty landscape through the window, but then
invented a picture to ﬁt the space, which immediately appeared and ﬁlled inthe gap. The picture represented a ﬁeld which was being ploughed up deeplyby some implement; and the fresh air together with the idea of hard workwhich accompanied the scene, and the blue-black clods of earth, produced alovely impression. He then went on further and saw a book upon educationopen in front of him . . . and was surprised that so much attention was de-voted in it to the sexual feelings (of children); and this led him to think of me.
And here is a pretty water dream, dreamt by a woman patient, which
served a special purpose in the treatment. At her summer holiday resort, bythe Lake of ——, she dived into the dark water just where the pale moon wasmirrored in it.
Dreams like this one are birth dreams. Their interpretation is reached
by reversing the event reported in the manifest dream; thus, instead of‘diving into the water’ we have ‘coming out of the water,’ i.e. being born.
3
We can discover the locality from which a child is born by calling to mind410 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This paragraph and the three following ones date from 1909.]
2 [A tunnel some 70 miles from Vienna on the main line to the southwest.]
3 [Footnote added 1914:] For the mythological signiﬁcance of birth from the water
see Rank (1909).9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 410the slang use of the word ‘lune ’ in French [viz. ‘bottom’]. The pale moon
was thus the white bottom which children are quick to guess that they
came out of. What was the meaning of the patient’s wishing to be bornat her summer holiday resort? I asked her and she replied without hesita-tion: ‘Isn’t it just as though I had been reborn through the treatment?’Thus the dream was an invitation to me to continue treating her at theholiday resort—that is, to visit her there. Perhaps there was a very timidhint in it, too, of the patient’s wish to become a mother herself.
1
I will quote another birth-dream, together with its interpretation,
from a paper by Ernest Jones [1910b ].2‘She stood on the sea-shore watching
a small boy, who seemed to be hers, wading into the water. This he did till thewater covered him and she could only see his head bobbing up and down nearthe surface. The scene then changed into the crowded hall of an hotel. Herhusband left her, and she “entered into conversation with” a stranger. The
second half of the dream revealed itself in the analysis as representing aﬂight from her husband and the entering into intimate relations with athird person. . . . The ﬁrst part of the dream was a fairly evident birth-phantasy. In dreams as in mythology, the delivery of the child from the
uterine waters is commonly presented by distortion as the entry of thechild intowater; among many others, the births of Adonis, Osiris, Moses
and Bacchus are well-known illustrations of this. The bobbing up anddown of the head into the water at once recalled to the patient the sensa-tion of quickening she had experienced in her only pregnancy. Thinkingof the boy going into the water induced a reverie in which she saw herselftaking him out of the water, carrying him to a nursery, washing him anddressing him, and installing him in her household.
‘The second half of the dream therefore represented thoughts concern-
ing the elopement, that belonged to the ﬁrst half of the underlying latent411 E. Some Further Typical Dreams
1 [Footnote 1909:] It was not for a long time that I learned to appreciate the im-
portance of phantasies and unconscious thoughts about life in the womb. They
contain an explanation of the remarkable dread that many people have of beingburied alive; and they also afford the deepest unconscious basis for the belief insurvival after death, which merely represents a projection into the future of thisuncanny life before birth. Moreover, the act of birth is the ﬁrst experience of anxiety,
and thus the source and prototype of the affect of anxiety. [Cf. a much later discus-
sion of this in a passage near the beginning of Chapter VIII of Freud’s Inhibi-
tions, Symptoms and Anxiety (1926d ).]
2 [This paragraph and the following one were added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 411content; the ﬁrst half of the dream corresponded with the second half of
the latent content, the birth-phantasy. Besides this inversion in order, fur-ther inversions took place in each half of the dream. In the ﬁrst half thechild entered the water, and then his head bobbed; in the underlying
dream-thoughts ﬁrst the quickening occurred and then the child leftthe
water (a double inversion). In the second half her husband left her; in thedream-thoughts she left her husband.’
Abraham (1909, 22 ff.) has reported another birth-dream, dreamt by
a young woman who was facing her ﬁrst conﬁnement. A subterraneanchannel led directly into the water from a place in the ﬂoor of her room(genital canal—amniotic ﬂuid). She raised a trap-door in the ﬂoor and acreature dressed in brown fur, very much resembling a seal, promptly ap-peared. This creature turned out to be the dreamer’s younger brother, towhom she had always been like a mother. [1911.]
Rank [1912 a] has shown from a series of dreams that birth-dreams
make use of the same symbolism as dreams with a urinary stimulus. Theerotic stimulus is represented in the latter as a urinary stimulus; and thestratiﬁcation of meaning in these dreams corresponds to a change that hascome over the meaning of the symbol since infancy. [1914.]
This is an appropriate point at which to return to a topic that was bro-
ken off in an earlier chapter (p. 257):
1the problem of the part played in the
formation of dreams by organic stimuli which disturb sleep. Dreams whichcome about under their inﬂuence openly exhibit not only the usual ten-dency to wish-fulﬁlment and to serving the end of convenience, but veryoften a perfectly transparent symbolism as well; for it not infrequently hap-pens that a stimulus awakens a dreamer after a vain attempt has been madeto deal with it in a dream under a symbolic disguise . This applies to dreams
of emission or orgasm as well as to those provoked by a need to micturateor defaecate. ‘The peculiar nature of emission dreams not only puts us in aposition to reveal directly certain sexual symbols which are already knownas being typical, but which have nevertheless been violently disputed; it alsoenables us to convince ourselves that some apparently innocent situationsin dreams are no more than a symbolic prelude to crudely sexual scenes.The latter are as a rule represented undisguisedly in the relatively rare emis-sion dreams, whereas they culminate often enough in anxiety dreams,which have the same result of awakening the sleeper.’ [Rank, ibid., 55.]412 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This paragraph and the three following ones date from 1919.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 412The symbolism of dreams with a urinary stimulus is especially trans-
parent and has been recognized from the earliest times. The view was al-
ready expressed by Hippocrates that dreams of fountains and springsindicate a disorder of the bladder (Havelock Ellis [1911, 164]). Scherner[1861, 189] studied the multiplicity of the symbolism of urinary stimuliand asserted that ‘any urinary stimulus of considerable strength invariablypasses over into stimulation of the sexual regions and symbolic represen-tations of them. . . . Dreams with a urinary stimulus are often at the sametime representatives of sexual dreams.’ [Ibid., 192.]
Otto Rank, whose discussion in his paper on the stratiﬁcation of sym-
bols in arousal dreams [Rank, 1912a ] I am here following, has made it
seem highly probable that a great number of dreams with a urinary stim-ulus have in fact been caused by a sexual stimulus which has made a ﬁrst
attempt to ﬁnd satisfaction regressively in the infantile form of urethralerotism. [Ibid., 78.] Those cases are particularly instructive in which theurinary stimulus thus set up leads to awakening and emptying the blad-der, but in which the dream is nevertheless continued and the need thenexpressed in undisguisedly erotic imagery.
1
Dreams with an intestinal stimulus throw light in an analogous fash-
ion on the symbolism involved in them, and at the same time conﬁrm theconnection between gold and faeces which is also supported by copiousevidence from social anthropology. (See Freud, 1908 b; Rank, 1912a ;
Dattner, 1913; and Reik, 1915.) ‘Thus, for instance, a woman who wasreceiving medical treatment for an intestinal disorder dreamt of someonewho was burying a treasure in the neighbourhood of a little wooden hutwhich looked like a rustic out-door closet. There was a second part to thedream in which she was wiping the behind of her little girl who haddirted herself.’ [Rank, 1912a, 55.]
Rescue dreams are connected with birth dreams. In women’s dreams,
to rescue, and especially to rescue from the water, has the same signiﬁcance413 E. Some Further Typical Dreams
1 [Footnote 1919:] ‘The same symbols which occur in their infantile aspect in
bladder dreams, appear with an eminentiy sexual meaning in their “recent” as-
pects: Water = urine = semen = amniotic ﬂuid; ship = “pump ship” (micturate)= uterus (box); to get wet = enuresis = copulation = pregnancy; to swim = fullbladder = abode of the unborn; rain = micturate = symbol of fertility; travel(starting, getting out) = getting out of bed = sexual intercourse (honeymoon);micturate = emission.’ (Rank, 1912 a, 95.)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 413as giving birth; but the meaning is modiﬁed if the dreamer is a man.1
[1911.]
Robbers, burglars and ghosts, of whom some people feel frightened be-
fore going to bed, and who sometimes pursue their victims after they are
asleep, all originate from one and the same class of infantile reminiscence.They are the nocturnal visitors who rouse children and take them up toprevent their wetting their beds, or who lift the bedclothes to make surewhere they have put their hands in their sleep. Analyses of some of theseanxiety-dreams have made it possible for me to identify these nocturnalvisitors more precisely. In every case the robbers stood for the sleeper’s fa-ther, whereas the ghosts corresponded to female ﬁgures in white night-gowns. [1909.]
(F)
SOME EXAMPLES—CALCULATIONS AND 
SPEECHES IN DREAMS2
Before assigning the fourth of the factors which govern the formation
of dreams to its proper place [cf. pp. 493 ff.], I propose to quote a numberof examples from my collection. These will serve partly to illustrate the in-terplay between the three factors already known to us and partly to provideconﬁrmatory evidence for what have hitherto been unsupported assertionsor to indicate some conclusions which inevitably follow from them. In giving an account of the dream-work, I have found very great difﬁcultyin backing my ﬁndings by examples. Instances in support of particular414 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Footnote 1911:] A dream of this kind has been reported by Pﬁster (1909). For
the symbolic meaning of rescuing see Freud, 1910 d, and Freud, 1910h. [Added
1914:] See also Rank (1911 b) and Reik (1911). [Added 1919:] See further, Rank
(1914). [A dream of rescue from the water will be found in the second case dis-
cussed by Freud in his paper on ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (1922a).]
2 [As in the case of Section E, a large part of the ﬁrst half of the present section
was added to the work in its later editions. The date of the ﬁrst inclusion of eachparagraph will accordingly be found attached to it in square brackets. The sec-ond half of the section (from p. 423 onwards) dates from the ﬁrst edition.— Another collection of examples of dream-analyses will be found in the twelfth ofFreud’s Introductory Lectures (1916–17).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 414propositions carry conviction only if they are treated in the context of the
interpretation of a dream as a whole. If they are torn from their contextthey lose their virtue; while, on the other hand, a dream-interpretationwhich is carried even a little way below the surface quickly becomes so vo-luminous as to make us lose the thread of the train of thought which it wasdesigned to illustrate. This technical difﬁculty must serve as my excuse ifin what follows I string together all sorts of things, whose only commonbond is their connection with the contents of the preceding sections of thischapter. [1900.]
I will begin by giving a few instances of peculiar or unusual modes of
representation in dreams.
A lady had the following dream: A servant girl was standing on a ladder
as if she were cleaning a window, and had a chimpanzee with her and a gorilla-cat (the dreamer afterwards corrected this to an angora cat). She
hurled the animals at the dreamer; the chimpanzee cuddled up to her, whichwas very disgusting.—This dream achieved its purpose by an extremelysimple device: it took a ﬁgure of speech literally and gave an exact repre-sentation of its wording. ‘Monkey,’ and animals’ names in general, areused as invectives; and the situation in the dream meant neither more norless than ‘hurling invectives.’ In the course of the present series of dreamswe shall come upon a number of other instances of the use of this simpledevice during the dream-work. [1900.]
Another dream adopted a very similar procedure. A woman had a child
with a remarkably deformed skull. The dreamer had heard that the child hadgrown like that owing to its position in the uterus. The doctor said that theskull might be given a better shape by compression, but that that would dam-age the child’s brain. She reﬂected that as he was a boy it would do him lessharm.—This dream contained a plastic representation of the abstractconcept of ‘impressions on children’ which the dreamer had met with inthe course of the explanations given her during her treatment. [1900.]
The dream-work adopted a slightly different method in the following
instance. The dream referred to an excursion to the Hilmteich
1near Graz.
The weather outside was fearful. There was a wretched hotel, water was drip-ping from the walls of the room, the bedclothes were damp. (The latter part
of the dream was reported less directly than I have given it.) The meaningof the dream was ‘superﬂuous.’ This abstract idea, which was present in415 F . Some Examples
1 [A stretch of water in the outskirts of the town.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 415the dream-thoughts, was in the ﬁrst instance given a somewhat forced
twist and put into some such form as ‘overﬂowing,’ ‘ﬂowing over’ or‘ﬂuid’—after which it was represented in a number of similar pictures: wa-ter outside, water on the walls inside, water in the dampness of the bed-clothes—everything ﬂowing or ‘overﬂowing.’ [1900.]
We shall not be surprised to ﬁnd that, for the purpose of representation
in dreams, the spelling of words is far less important than their sound, es-pecially when we bear in mind that the same rule holds good in rhymingverse. Rank (1910, 482) has recorded in detail, and analysed very fully, agirl’s dream in which the dreamer described how she was walking throughthe ﬁelds and cutting off rich ears [‘ Ähren ’] of barley and wheat. A friend
of her youth came towards her, but she tried to avoid meeting him. Theanalysis showed that the dream was concerned with a kiss—an ‘hon-ourable kiss’ [‘Kuss in Ehren ’ pronounced the same as ‘ Ähren,’ literally, ‘kiss
in honour’]
1. In the dream itself the ‘ Ähren,’ which had to be cut off, not
pulled off, ﬁgured as ears of corn, while, condensed with ‘Ehren,’ theystood for a whole number of other [latent] thoughts. [1911.]
On the other hand, in other cases, the course of linguistic evolution has
made things very easy for dreams. For language has a whole number ofwords at its command which originally had a pictorial and concrete sig-niﬁcance, but are used today in a colourless and abstract sense. All that thedream need do is to give these words their former, full meaning or to goback a little way to an earlier phase in their development. A man had adream, for instance, of his brother being in a Kasten [‘box’]. In the course
of interpretation the Kasten was replaced by a Schrank [‘cupboard’—also
used abstractly for ‘barrier,’ ‘restriction’]. The dream-thought had been tothe effect that his brother ought to restrict himself [‘ sich einschränken ’]—
instead of the dreamer doing so.
2[1909.]
Another man dreamt that he climbed to the top of a mountain which
commanded a quite unusually extensive view. Here he was identifying
himself with a brother of his who was the editor of a survey which dealt
with far Eastern affairs. [1911.]416 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [The reference is to a German proverb: ‘ Einen Kuss in Ehren kann niemand ver-
wehren ’ (‘No one can refuse an honourable kiss’). The dreamer had in reality been
given her ﬁrst kiss as she was walking through a cornﬁeld—a kiss among the ears
of corn.]
2 [This instance and the next are also quoted (with somewhat different comments)
in respectively the seventh and eighth of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916–17).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 416In Der Grüne Heinrich1a dream is related in which a mettlesome horse
was rolling about in a beautiful ﬁeld of oats, each grain of which was ‘a
sweet almond, a raisin and a new penny piece . . . wrapped up together inred silk and tied up with a bit of pig’s bristle.’ The author (or dreamer)gives us an immediate interpretation of this dream-picture: the horse feltagreeably tickled and called out ‘Der Hafer sticht mich!’
2[1914.]
According to Henzen [1890] dreams involving puns and turns of
speech occur particularly often in the old Norse sagas, in which scarcely adream is to be found which does not contain an ambiguity or a play uponwords. [1914.]
It would be a work in itself to collect these modes of representation
and to classify them according to their underlying principles. [1909.]Some of these representations might almost be described as jokes, andthey give one a feeling that one would never have understood them with-out the dreamer’s help. [1911.]
(1) A man dreamt that he was asked someone’s name, but could not
think of it. He himself explained that what this meant was that ‘he wouldnever dream of such a thing.’ [1911.]
(2)
3A woman patient told me a dream in which all the people were es-
pecially big. ‘That means,’ she went on, ‘that the dream must be to dowith events in my early childhood, for at that time, of course, all grown-up people seemed to me enormously big.’ [Cf. p. 62 n.] She herself did
not appear in the content of this dream.—The fact of a dream referringto childhood may also be expressed in another way, namely by a transla-tion of time into space. The characters and scenes are seen as though theywere at a great distance, at the end of a long road, or as though they werebeing looked at through the wrong end of a pair of opera-glasses. [1911.]
(3) A man who in his working life tended to use abstract and indeﬁ-
nite phraseology, though he was quite sharp-witted in general, dreamt onone occasion that he arrived at a railway station just as a train was coming417 F . Some Examples
1 [Part IV, Chapter 6, of Gottfried Keller’s novel.]
2 [Literally: ‘The oats are pricking me,’ but with the idiomatic meaning of ‘Pros-
perity has spoiled me.’]
3 [This and the two following examples were ﬁrst published in a short paper,
‘Nachträge zur Traumdeutung ’ (Freud, 1911a). See above, p. 373 n.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 417in. What then happened was that the platform moved towards the train,
while the train stopped still—an absurd reversal of what actually happens.This detail was no more than an indication that we should expect to ﬁndanother reversal in the dream’s content. [Cf. p. 341.] The analysis of thedream led to the patient’s recollecting some picture-books in which therewere illustrations of men standing on their heads and walking on theirhands. [1911.]
(4) Another time the same dreamer told me a short dream which was
almost reminiscent of the technique of a rebus. He dreamt that his uncle
gave him a kiss in an automobile. He went on at once to give me the inter-pretation, which I myself would never have guessed: namely that it meantauto-erotism. The content of this dream might have been produced as ajoke in waking life.
1[1911.]
(5) A man dreamt that he was pulling a woman out from behind a bed .
The meaning of this was that he was giving her preference.2(1914.)
(6) A man dreamt that he was an ofﬁcer sitting at a table opposite the
Emperor. This meant that he was putting himself in opposition to his father. [1914.]
(7) A man dreamt that he was treating someone for a broken limb . The
analysis showed that the broken bone [‘ Knochenbruch’] stood for a broken
marriage [‘ Ehebruch ,’ properly ‘adultery’].
3[1914.]
(8) The time of day in dreams very often stands for the age of the
dreamer at some particular period in his childhood. Thus, in one dream,418 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [‘Auto ’ is the ordinary German word for ‘motor-car.’—This dream is reported
in slightly different terms in Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916–17), Lecture
XV.]
2 [The point here is a purely verbal one, depending on the similarity of the Ger-
man words for ‘pulling out’ (‘hervorziehen ’) and ‘giving preference to’
(‘vorziehen ’). This dream is also quoted in Freud, Introductory Lectures (1916–
17), Lecture VII. Nos. 5, 6, 8 and 9 of the present set of examples were pub-
lished ﬁrst in Freud, 1913 h.]
3 [This example is also quoted in Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916–17), Lecture
XI, where, in a footnote, a ‘symptomatic act’ is reported, which conﬁrms thisparticular interpretation.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 418‘a quarter past ﬁve in the morning’ meant the age of ﬁve years and three
months, which was signiﬁcant, since that was the dreamer’s age at thetime of the birth of his younger brother. [1914.]
(9) Here is another method of representing ages in a dream. A woman
dreamt that she was walking with two little girls whose ages differed by ﬁfteenmonths . She was unable to recall any family of her acquaintance to whom
this applied. She herself put forward the interpretation that the two chil-dren both represented herself and that the dream was reminding her thatthe two traumatic events of her childhood were separated from each otherby precisely that interval. One had occurred when she was three and ahalf, the other when she was four and three-quarters. [1914.]
(10) It is not surprising that a person undergoing psycho-analytic
treatment should often dream of it and be led to give expression in hisdreams to the many thoughts and expectations to which the treatmentgives rise. The imagery most frequently chosen to represent it is that of ajourney, usually by motor-car, as being a modern and complicated vehicle.The speed of the car will then be used by the patient as an opportunityfor giving vent to ironical comments.—If ‘the unconscious,’ as an elementin the subject’s waking thoughts, has to be represented in a dream, it maybe replaced very appropriately by subterranean regions.—These, wherethey occur without any reference to analytic treatment, stand for the fe-
male body or the womb.—‘Down below’ in dreams often relates to thegenitals, ‘up above,’ on the contrary, to the face, mouth or breast.—Wildbeasts are as a rule employed by the dream-work to represent passionateimpulses of which the dreamer is afraid, whether they are his own or thoseof other people. (It then needs only a slight displacement for the wildbeasts to come to represent the people who are possessed by these pas-sions. We have not far to go from here to cases in which a dreaded fatheris represented by a beast of prey or a dog or wild horse—a form of repre-sentation recalling totemism.)
1It might be said that the wild beasts are
used to represent the libido, a force dreaded by the ego and combated bymeans of repression. It often happens, too, that the dreamer separates offhis neurosis, his ‘sick personality,’ from himself and depicts it as an inde-pendent person. [1919.]419 F . Some Examples
1 [See Freud, Totem and T aboo (1912–13), Chapter IV, Section 3.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 419(11) Here is an example recorded by Hanns Sachs (1911): ‘We know
from Freud’s Interpretation of Dreams that the dream-work makes use of
different methods for giving a sensory form to words or phrases. If, for in-
stance, the expression that is to be represented is an ambiguous one, thedream-work may exploit the fact by using the ambiguity as a switch-point:where one of the meanings of the word is present in the dream-thoughtsthe other one can be introduced into the manifest dream. This was the casein the following short dream in which ingenious use was made for repre-sentational purposes of appropriate impressions of the previous day. I wassuffering from a cold on the “dream-day,” and I had therefore decided inthe evening that, if I possibly could, I would avoid getting out of bed dur-ing the night. I seemed in the dream merely to be continuing what I hadbeen doing during the day. I had been engaged in sticking press-cuttingsinto an album and had done my best to put each one in the place where itbelonged. I dreamt that I was trying to paste a cutting into the album. But it
wouldn’t go on to the page (“er geht nicht auf die Seite ”), which caused me
much pain. I woke up and became aware that the pain in the dream per-sisted in the form of a pain in my inside, and I was compelled to abandonthe decision I had made before going to bed. My dream, in its capacity ofguardian of my sleep, had given me the illusion of a fulﬁlment of my wishto stop in bed, by means of a plastic representation of the ambiguous phrase“er geht nicht auf die Seite ” [“he isn’t going to the lavatory”].’ [1914.]
We can go so far as to say that the dream-work makes use, for the pur-
pose of giving a visual representation of the dream-thoughts, of any meth-ods within its reach, whether waking criticism regards them as legitimateor illegitimate. This lays the dream-work open to doubt and derision onthe part of everyone who has only heard of dream-interpretation but
never practised it. Stekel’s book, Die Sprache des Traumes (1911), is par-
ticularly rich in examples of this kind. I have, however, avoided quotinginstances from it, on account of the author’s lack of critical judgementand of the arbitrariness of his technique, which give rise to doubts evenin unprejudiced minds. [Cf. p. 363 f.] [1919.]
(12) [1914.] The following examples are taken from a paper by
V. Tausk (1914) on the use of clothes and colours in dreaming.
(a) A. dreamt of seeing a former governess of his in a dress of black luster
[‘Lüster ’] which ﬁtted very tight across her buttocks .—This was explained as
meaning that the governess was lustful [‘ lüstern ’].420 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 420(b) C. dreamt of seeing a girl on the–——Road, who was bathed in
white light and was wearing a white blouse .—The dreamer had had inti-
mate relations with a Miss White for the ﬁrst time on this road.
(c) Frau D. dreamt of seeing the eighty-year-old Viennese actor Blasel ly-
ing on a sofa in full armour [‘in voller Rüstung ’]. He began jumping over
 tables and chairs, drew a dagger, looked at himself in the looking-glass and
brandished the dagger in the air as though he was ﬁghting an imaginary enemy .—Interpretation: The dreamer suffered from a long-standing af-
fection of the bladder [‘ Blase’]. She lay on a sofa for her analysis; when she
looked at herself in a looking-glass, she thought privately that in spite ofher age and illness she still looked hale and hearty [‘ rüstig ’].
(13) [1919.] A ‘ Great Achievement’ in a Dream .—A man dreamt
that he was a pregnant woman lying in bed. He found the situation very dis-
agreeable. He called out: ‘I’d rather be . . .’ (during the analysis, after calling
to mind a nurse, he completed the sentence with the words ‘breakingstones’). Behind the bed there was hanging a map, the bottom edge of which
was kept stretched by a strip of wood. He tore the strip of wood down by catchinghold of its two ends. It did not break across but split into two halves lengthways.This action relieved him and at the same time helped on delivery .
Without any assistance he interpreted tearing down the strip [‘ Leiste’]
as a great achievement [‘ Leistung’]. He was escaping from his uncomfort-
able situation (in the treatment) by tearing himself out of his feminine attitude. . . . The absurd detail of the strip of wood not simply breakingbut splitting lengthways was explained thus: the dreamer recalled that thiscombination of doubling and destroying was an allusion to castration.Dreams very often represent castration by the presence of two penis sym-bols as the deﬁant expression of an antithetical wish [cf. p. 370]. Inciden-tally, the ‘ Leiste ’ [‘groin’] is a part of the body in the neighbourhood of
the genitals. The dreamer summed up the interpretation of the dream asmeaning that he had got the better of the threat of castration which hadled to his adopting a feminine attitude.
1421 F . Some Examples
1 [This example was ﬁrst published as a separate paper (1914 e). In reprinting it
here, Freud omitted a passage, which occurred originally after the words ‘by tear-
ing himself out of his feminine attitude.’ The omitted passage (which has neverbeen reprinted) deals with Silberer’s ‘functional phenomenon,’ discussed below,on pp. 507 ff. It ran as follows: ‘No objection can be made to this interpretationof the patient’s; but I would not describe it as “functional” simply because his9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 421(14) [1919.] In an analysis which I was conducting in French a dream
came up for interpretation in which I appeared as an elephant. I naturally
asked the dreamer why I was represented in that form. ‘ Vous me trompez ’
[‘you are deceiving me’] was his reply (‘ trompe’ = ‘trunk’).
The dream-work can often succeed in representing very refractory ma-
terial, such as proper names, by a far-fetched use of out-of-the-way asso-ciations. In one of my dreams old Brücke
1had set me the task of making a
dissection; . . . I ﬁshed something out that looked like a piece of crumpled silver-paper. (I shall return to this dream later [see pp. 459 ff.].) The asso-ciation to this (at which I arrived with some difﬁculty) was ‘stanniol.’
2I
then perceived that I was thinking of the name of Stannius, the author ofa dissertation on the nervous system of ﬁsh, which I had greatly admiredin my youth. The ﬁrst scientiﬁc task which my teacher [Brücke] set mewas in fact concerned with the nervous system of a ﬁsh, Ammocoetes[Freud, 1877a]. It was clearly impossible to make use of the name of thisﬁsh in a picture puzzle. [1900].
At this point I cannot resist recording a very peculiar dream, which
also deserves to be noticed as having been dreamt by a child, and whichcan easily be explained analytically. ‘I remember having often dreamtwhen I was a child,’ said a lady, ‘ that God wore a paper cocked-hat on his
head. I used very often to have a hat of that sort put on my head at meals,
to prevent my being able to look at the other children’s plates, to see howbig their helpings were. As I had heard that God was omniscient, the422 VI. The Dream-Work
dream-thoughts related to his attitude in the treatment. Thoughts of that kind
serve as “material” for the construction of dreams like anything else. It is hard tosee why the thoughts of a person under analysis should not be concerned withhis behaviour during treatment. [Cf. also p. 236, n. 3.] The distinction between“material” and “functional” phenomena in Silberer’s sense is of signiﬁcance onlywhere—as was the case in Silberer’s well-known self-observations as he wasfalling asleep [see pp. 358 ff.]—there is an alternative between the subject’s at-
tention being directed either to some piece of thought-content present in hismind orto his own actual psychical state, and not where that state itself consti-
tutes the content of his thoughts.’ Freud also remarked in parenthesis that in anycase the ‘absurd detail of the strip of wood not simply breaking but splittinglengthways’ could not be ‘functional.’]
1 [See footnote, p. 487.]
2 [Silver paper = tin-foil; stanniol is a derivative of tin (stannium).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 422meaning of the dream was that I knew everything—even in spite of the
hat that had been put on my head.’1[1909.]
The nature of the dream-work2and the way in which it plays about
with its material, the dream-thoughts, are instructively shown when wecome to consider numbers and calculations that occur in dreams. More-over, numbers in dreams are regarded superstitiously as being especiallysigniﬁcant in regard to the future.
3I shall therefore select a few instances
of this kind from my collection.
i
Extract from a dream dreamt by a lady shortly before her treatment
came to an end: She was going to pay for something. Her daughter took 3
ﬂorins and 65 kreuzers from her (the mother’s ) purse. The dreamer said to
her: ‘What are you doing? It only costs 21 kreuzers.’4Owing to my knowl-
edge of the dreamer’s circumstances, this bit of dream was intelligible tome without any further explanation on her part. The lady came fromabroad and her daughter was at school in Vienna. She was in a positionto carry on her treatment with me as long as her daughter remained inVienna. The girl’s school year was due to end in three weeks and this alsomeant the end of the lady’s treatment. The day before the dream, thehead-mistress had asked her whether she would not consider leaving herdaughter at school for another year. From this suggestion she had evi-dently gone on to reﬂect that in that case she might also continue hertreatment. This was what the dream referred to. One year is equal to 365423 F . Calculations in Dreams
1 [This dream is also discussed in Freud, Introductory Lectures (1916–17), Lecture
VII.]
2 [The remainder of the present section (F), with the exception of Example IV on
p. 426, appeared in the original edition (1900).]
3 [This point is discussed by Freud in Chapter XII (7) of his Psycho-pathology of
Everyday Life (1901b ) and in Section II of his paper on ‘The Uncanny’ (1919 h).]
4 [The old Austrian currency in ﬂorins and kreuzers was not replaced until after
the ﬁrst publication of this book. 1 ﬂorin (= 100 kreuzers) was at that time ap-
proximately equivalent to an English 1s . 10d . or an American 40 cents. Accord-
ingly, of the sums mentioned in this dream and the next, 3 ﬂ. 65 would havebeen about 6s . or $1.25; 21 kr. about 4d . or 7½ cents; 1 ﬂ. 50 about 2 s. 6d. or
62½ cents; and 150 ﬂ. about £12 10 s. or $62.50.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 423days. The three weeks which remained both of the school-year and of the
treatment were equivalent to 21 days (though the hours of treatmentwould be less than this). The numbers, which in the dream-thoughts re-ferred to periods of time, were attached in the dream itself to sums ofmoney—not but what there was a deeper meaning involved, for ‘time ismoney.’ 365 kreuzers only amount to 3 ﬂorins and 65 kreuzers; and thesmallness of the sums that occurred in the dream was obviously the resultof wish-fulﬁlment. The dreamer’s wish reduced the cost both of the treat-ment and of the year’s school-fees.
ii
The numbers which occurred in another dream involved more com-
plicated circumstances. A lady who, though she was still young, had beenmarried for a number of years, received news that an acquaintance ofhers, Elise L., who was almost exactly her contemporary, had just becomeengaged. Thereupon she had the following dream. She was at the theatre
with her husband. One side of the stalls was completely empty. Her husbandtold her thai Elise L. and her ﬁancé had wanted to go too; but had only beenable to get bad seats —three for 1 ﬂorin 50 kreuzers
1—and of course they
could not take those. She thought it would not really have done any harm ifthey had.
What was the origin of the 1 ﬂorin 50 kreuzers? It came from what was
in fact an indifferent event of the previous day. Her sister-in-law had beengiven a present of 150 ﬂorins by her husband and had been in a hurry toget rid of them by buying a piece of jewellery. It is to be noticed that 150ﬂorins is a hundred times as much as 1 ﬂorin 50 kreuzers. Where did the
three come from which was the number of the theatre tickets? The only
connection here was that her newly-engaged friend was the same numberof months— three—her junior. The solution of the dream was arrived at
with the discovery of the meaning of the empty stalls. They were an un-modiﬁed allusion to a small incident which had given her husband a goodexcuse for teasing her. She had planned to go to one of the plays that hadbeen announced for the coming week and had taken the trouble to buytickets several days ahead, and had therefore had to pay a booking fee.424 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [See previous footnote.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 424When they got to the theatre they found that one side of the house was al-
most empty. There had been no need for her to be in such a hurry.
Let me now put the dream-thoughts in place of the dream. ‘It was ab-
surd to marry so early. There was no need for me to be in such a hurry. I see
from Elise L.’s example that I should have got a husband in the end. In-deed, I should have got one a hundred times better’ (a treasure) ‘if I had
only waited ’ (in antithesis to her sister-in-law’s hurry ). ‘My money’ (or
dowry) ‘could have bought three men just as good.’
It will be observed that the meaning and context of the numbers have
been altered to a far greater extent in this dream than in the former one.The processes of modiﬁcation and distortion have gone further here; andthis is to be explained by the dream-thoughts in this case having to over-come a specially high degree of endopsychic resistance before they couldobtain representation. Nor should we overlook the fact that there was anele ment of absurdity in the dream, namely the three seats being taken by
two people. I will anticipate my discussion of absurdity in dreams [pp. 434
ff.] by pointing out that this absurd detail in the content of the dream wasintended to represent the most strongly emphasized of the dream-thoughts,viz., ‘it was absurd to marry so early.’ The absurdity which had to ﬁnd a
place in the dream was ingeniously supplied by the number 3, which wasitself derived from a quite immaterial point of distinction between the twopeople under comparison—the 3 months’ difference between their ages.The reduction of the actual 150 ﬂorins to 1 ﬂorin 50 corresponded to thelow value assigned by the dreamer to her husband (or treasure), in her sup-
pressed thoughts.
1
iii
The next example exhibits the methods of calculation employed by
dreams, which have brought them into so much disrepute. A man had adream that he was settled in a chair at the B.’s —a family with which he had
been formerly acquainted—and said to them: ‘It was a great mistake your425 F . Calculations in Dreams
1 [This dream is more elaborately analysed at various points in Freud’s Introduc-
tory Lectures (1916–17), particularly at the end of Lecture VII and in two places
in Lecture XIV. It and the preceding dream are also recorded in Section VII of
Freud’s work On Dreams (1901a), Standard Ed. , 5,669.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 425not letting me have Mali.’ —‘How old are you?’ he then went on to ask the
girl.—‘I was born in 1882,’ she replied. —‘Oh, so you’re 28, then.’
Since the dream dates from 1898 this was evidently a miscalculation,
and the dreamer’s inability to do sums would deserve to be compared
with that of a general paralytic unless it could be explained in some otherway. My patient was one of those people who, whenever they happen tocatch sight of a woman, cannot let her alone in their thoughts. The pa-tient who for some months used regularly to come next after him in myconsulting room, and whom he thus ran into, was a young lady; he usedconstantly to make enquiries about her and was most anxious to create agood impression with her. It was she whose age he estimated at 28 years.So much by way of explanation of the result of the ostensible calculation.1882, incidentally, was the year in which the dreamer had married.—Imay add that he was unable to resist entering into conversation with thetwo other members of the female sex whom he came across in myhouse—the two maids (neither of them by any means youthful), one orother of whom used to open the door to him; he explained their lack ofresponse as being due to their regarding him as an elderly gentleman ofsettled habits.
iv1
Here is another dream dealing with ﬁgures, which is characterized by
the clarity of the manner in which it was determined, or rather, over -determined. I owe both the dream and its interpretation to Dr. B. Dat-tner. ‘The landlord of my block of ﬂats, who is a police-constable, dreamtthat he was on street duty. (This was a wish-fulﬁlment.) An inspector came
up to him, who had the number 22 followed by 62 or 26, on his collar. At
any rate there were several twos on it.
‘The mere fact that in reporting the dream the dreamer broke up the
number 2262 showed that its components had separate meanings. He re-called that the day before there had been some talk at the police stationabout the men’s length of service. The occasion for it was an inspectorwho had retired on his pension at the age of 62. The dreamer had onlyserved for 22 years, and it would be 2 years and 2 months before he426 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This example was added in 1911.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 426would be eligible for a 90 per cent pension. The dream represented in the
ﬁrst place the fulﬁlment of a long-cherished wish of the dreamer’s toreach the rank of inspector. The superior ofﬁcer with “2262” on his collarwas the dreamer himself. He was on street duty—another favourite wishof his—he had served his remaining 2 years and 2 months and now, likethe 62-year-old inspector, he could retire on a full pension.’
1
When we take together these and some other examples which I shall
give later [pp. 456 ff.], we may safely say that the dream-work does not infact carry out any calculations at all, whether correctly or incorrectly; itmerely throws into the form of a calculation numbers which are present in
the dream-thoughts and can serve as allusions to matter that cannot be rep-resented in any other way. In this respect the dream-work is treating num-bers as a medium for the expression of its purpose in precisely the same wayas it treats any other idea, including proper names and speeches that occurrecognizably as verbal presentations. [See next paragraph but one.]
For the dream-work cannot actually create speeches. [See above, pp. 206
f. and 321.] However much speeches and conversations, whether reasonableor unreasonable in themselves, may ﬁgure in dreams, analysis  invariablyproves that all that the dream has done is to extract from the dream-thoughts fragments of speeches which have really been made or heard. Itdeals with these fragments in the most arbitrary fashion. Not only does itdrag them out of their context and cut them in pieces, incorporating someportions and rejecting others, but it often puts them together in a new order,so that a speech which appears in the dream to be a connected whole turnsout in analysis to be composed of three or four detached fragments. In pro-ducing this new version, a dream will often abandon the meaning that thewords originally had in the dream-thoughts and give them a fresh one.
2If
we look closely into a speech that occurs in a dream, we shall ﬁnd that itconsists on the one hand of relatively clear and compact portions and on the427 F . Calculations in Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] For analyses of other dreams containing numbers, see
Jung [1911], Marcinowski [1912b] and others. These often imply very compli-
cated operations with numbers, which have been carried out by the dreamerwith astonishing accuracy. See also Jones (1912 a).
2 [Footnote added 1909:] in this respect neuroses behave exactly like dreams. I
know a patient one of whose symptoms is that, involuntarily and against herwill, she hears—i.e. hallucinates—songs or fragments of songs, without beingable to understand what part they play in her mental life. (Incidentally, she is9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 427other hand of portions which serve as connecting matter and have probably
been ﬁlled in at a later stage, just as, in reading, we ﬁll in any letters or sylla-bles that may have been accidentally omitted. Thus speeches in dreams havea structure similar to that of breccia, in which largish blocks of various kindsof stone are cemented together by a binding medium. [Cf. p. 457.]
Strictly speaking, this description applies only to such speeches in
dreams as possess something of the sensory quality of speech, and whichare described by the dreamer himself as being speeches. Other sorts ofspeeches, which are not, as it were, felt by him as having been heard or428 VI. The Dream-Work
certainly not paranoiac.) Analysis has shown that, by allowing herself a certain
amount of licence, she puts the text of these songs to false uses. For instance inthe lines from [Agathe’s aria in Weber’s Freischütz] ‘Leise, leise, Fromme Weise!’
[literally, ‘Softly, softly, devout melody’] the last word was taken by her uncon-scious as though it was spelt ‘Waise’ [= ‘orphan,’ thus making the lines read
‘Softly, softly, pious orphan,’] the orphan being herself. Again ‘O du selige, o du
fröhliche’ [‘Oh thou blessèd and happy . . .’] is the opening of a Christmas carol;
by not continuing the quotation to the word ‘Christmastide’ she turned it intoa bridal song.—The same mechanism of distortion can also operate in the oc-currence of an idea unaccompanied by hallucination. Why was it that one of my
patients was pestered by the recollection of a poem that he had had to learn inhis youth: ‘ Nächtlich am Busento lispeln . . . ’ [‘By night on the Busento whisper-
ing . . .’]? Because his imagination went no further than the ﬁrst part of this quo-tation: ‘Nächtlich am Busen,’ [‘By night on the bosom.’]
We are familiar with the fact that this same technical trick is used by parodists.
Included in a series of ‘Illustrations to the German Classics’ published in Fliegende
Blätter [the well-known comic paper] was one which illustrated Schiller’s ‘Sieges-
fest,’ with the following quotation attached to it:
Und des frisch erkämpften WeibesFreut sich der Atrid und strickt  . . .
[The conqu’ring son of Atreus sits
At his fair captive’s side and knits. . . .]
Here the quotation broke off. In the original the lines continue:
. . . Um den Reiz des schönen Leibes
Seine Anne hochbeglückt.
[. . . His joyful and triumphant arms
About her body’s lovely charms.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 428spoken (that is, which have no acoustic or motor accompaniments in the
dream), are merely thoughts such as occur in our waking thought-activityand are often carried over unmodiﬁed into our dreams. Another copioussource of undifferentiated speeches of this kind, though one which it isdifﬁcult to follow up, seems to be provided by material that has been read.But whatever stands out markedly in dreams as a speech can be tracedback to real speeches which have been spoken or heard by the dreamer.
Instances showing that speeches in dreams have this origin have already
been given by me in the course of analysing dreams which I have quotedfor quite other purposes. Thus, in the ‘innocent’ market dream reportedon p. 206, the spoken words ‘that’s not obtainable any longer’ served toidentify me with the butcher, while one portion of the other speech, ‘Idon’t recognize that; I won’t take it,’ was actually responsible for makingthe dream an ‘innocent’ one. The dreamer, it will be remembered, havinghad some suggestion made to her on the previous day by her cook, hadreplied with the words: ‘I don’t recognize that; behave yourself properly!’The innocent-sounding ﬁrst part of this speech was taken into the dream
by way of allusion to its second part, which ﬁtted excellently into the phan-
tasy underlying the dream, but would at the same time have betrayed it.
Here is another example, which will serve instead of many, all of them
leading to the same conclusion.
The dreamer was in a big courtyard in which some dead bodies were being
burnt. ‘I’m off,’ he said, ‘I can’t bear the sight of it.’ (This was not deﬁnitely a
speech.) He then met two butcher’s boys. ‘Well,’ he asked, ‘did it taste nice?’
‘No,’ one of them answered, ‘not a bit nice’— as though it had been human ﬂesh.
The innocent occasion of the dream was as follows. The dreamer and
his wife had paid a visit after supper to their neighbours, who were excel-lent people but not precisely appetizing. The hospitable old lady was just
having her supper and had tried to force him (there is a phrase with a sex-
ual sense used jokingly among men to render this idea
1) to taste some of
it. He had declined, saying he had no appetite left: ‘Get along!’ she hadreplied, ‘you can manage it,’ or words to that effect. He had therefore beenobliged to taste it and had complimented her on it, saying: ‘That was verynice.’ When he was once more alone with his wife he had grumbled at hisneighbour’s insistence and also at the quality of the food. The thought, ‘I429 F . Calculations in Dreams
1 [‘Notzüchtigen,’ ‘to force sexually,’ ‘to rape,’ is so used in place of ‘nötigen,’ ‘to force’
(in the ordinary sense).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 429can’t bear the sight of it,’ which in the dream too failed to emerge as a
speech in the strict sense, was an allusion to the physical charms of the ladyfrom which the invitation had come, and it must be taken as meaning thathe had no desire to look at them.
More instruction can be derived from another dream, which I shall re-
port in this connection on account of the very distinct speech whichformed its centre-point, although I shall have to put off explaining it fullytill I come to discuss affect in dreams [pp. 466 ff.]. I had a very clear dream.I had gone to Brücke’s laboratory at night, and, in response to a gentle knockon the door, I opened it to (the late) Professor Fleischl,
1who came in with a
number of strangers and, after exchanging a few words, sat down at his table.This was followed by a second dream. My friend Fl. [Fliess] had come to Vi-
enna unobtrusively in July. I met him in the street in conversation with my (de-
ceased) friend P ., and went with them to some place where they sat opposite
each other as though they were at a small table. I sat in front at its narrow end.Fl. spoke about his sister and said that in three quarters of an hour she wasdead, and added some such words as ‘that was the threshold.’ As P . failed to un-derstand him,
2Fl. turned to me and asked me how much I had told P . about
his affairs. Whereupon, overcome by strange emotions, I tried to explain to Fl.that P . (could not understand anything at all, of course, because he )was not
alive. But what I actually said —and I myself noticed the mistake— was, ‘Non
vixit.’ I then gave P . a piercing look. Under my gaze he turned pale; his form
grew indistinct and his eyes a sickly blue —and ﬁnally he melted away. I was
highly delighted at this and I now realized that Ernst Fleischl, too, had been nomore than an apparition, a ‘revenant’ [‘ghost’—literally, ‘one who returns’];and it seemed to me quite possible that people of that kind only existed as longas one liked and could be got rid of if someone else wished it.
This ﬁne specimen includes many of the characteristics of dreams—the
fact that I exercised my critical faculties during the dream and myself no-ticed my mistake when I said ‘Non vixit’ instead of ‘Non vivit’ [that is, ‘he
did not live’ instead of ‘he is not alive’], my unconcerned dealings withpeople who were dead and were recognized as being dead in the dream it-self, the absurdity of my ﬁnal inference and the great satisfaction it gaveme. This dream exhibits so many of these puzzling features, indeed, that Iwould give a great deal to be able to present the complete solution of its430 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [See footnote on p. 487 for an explanation of the persons concerned.]
2 [This detail is analysed below on p. 517.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 430conundrums. But in point of fact I am incapable of doing so—of doing,
that is to say, what I did in the dream, of sacriﬁcing to my ambition peoplewhom I greatly value. Any concealment, however, would destroy what Iknow very well to be the dream’s meaning; and I shall therefore contentmyself, both here and in a later context [pp. 485 ff.], with selecting only afew of its elements for interpretation.
The central feature of the dream was a scene in which I annihilated P .
with a look. His eyes changed to a strange and uncanny blue and hemelted away. This scene was unmistakably copied from one which I hadactually experienced. At the time I have in mind I had been a demonstra-tor at the Physiological Institute and was due to start work early in themorning. It came to Brücke’s ears that I sometimes reached the students’laboratory late. One morning he turned up punctually at the hour ofopening and awaited my arrival. His words were brief and to the point.But it was not they that mattered. What overwhelmed me were the terri-ble blue eyes with which he looked at me and by which I was reduced tonothing—just as P . was in the dream, where, to my relief, the roles werereversed. No one who can remember the great man’s eyes, which retainedtheir striking beauty even in his old age, and who has ever seen him inanger, will ﬁnd it difﬁcult to picture the young sinner’s emotions.
It was a long time, however, before I succeeded in tracing the origin of
the ‘Non vixit’ with which I passed judgement in the dream. But at last it
occurred to me that these two words possessed their high degree of clarityin the dream, not as words heard or spoken, but as words seen. I then knew
at once where they came from. On the pedestal of the Kaiser Josef Memo-rial in the Hofburg [Imperial Palace] in Vienna the following impressivewords are inscribed:
Saluti patriae vixitnon diu sed totus.
1431 F . Calculations in Dreams
1 [‘For the well-being of his country he lived not long but wholly.’]— Footnote
added 1925:] The actual wording of the inscription is:
Saluti publicae vixit
non diu sed totus.
The reason for my mistake in putting ‘patriae’ for ‘publicae’ has probably been
rightly guessed by Wittels [1924, 86; Engl. trans. (1924), 100 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 431I extracted from this inscription just enough to ﬁt in with a hostile train
of ideas among the dream-thoughts, just enough to imply that ‘this fellowhas no say in the matter—he isn’t even alive.’ And this reminded me thatI had the dream only a few days after the unveiling of the memorial toFleischl in the cloisters of the University.
1At that time I had seen the
Brücke memorial once again and must have reﬂected (unconsciously)with regret on the fact that the premature death of my brilliant friend P .,whose whole life had been devoted to science, had robbed him of a well-merited claim to a memorial in these same precincts. Accordingly, I gavehim this memorial in my dream; and, incidentally, as I remembered, hisﬁrst name was Josef.
2
By the rules of dream-interpretation I was even now not entitled to pass
from the Non vixit derived from my recollection of the Kaiser Josef Me-morial to the Non vixit required by the sense of the dream-thoughts. There
must have been some other element in the dream-thoughts which wouldhelp to make the transition possible. It then struck me as noticeable thatin the scene in the dream there was a convergence of a hostile and an af-fectionate current of feeling towards my friend P ., the former being on thesurface and the latter concealed, but both of them being represented in thesingle phrase Non vixit. As he had deserved well of science I built him a
memorial; but as he was guilty of an evil wish
3(which was expressed at the
end of the dream) I annihilated him. I noticed that this last sentence hada quite special cadence, and I must have had some model in my mind.Where was an antithesis of this sort to be found, a juxtaposition like thisof two opposite reactions towards a single person, both of them claimingto be completely justiﬁed and yet not incompatible? Only in one passagein literature—but a passage which makes a profound impression on thereader: in Brutus’s speech of self-justiﬁcation in Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar
[iii, 2], ‘As Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoiceat it; as he was valiant, I honour him; but, as he was ambitious, I slewhim.’ Were not the formal structure of these sentences and their antitheti-432 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This ceremony took place on October 16, 1898.]
2 I may add as an example of overdetermination that my excuse for arriving too
late at the laboratory lay in the fact that after working far into the night I had in
the morning to cover the long distance between the Kaiser Josef Strasse and the
Währinger Strasse.
3 [This detail is further explained below, on p. 490.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 432cal meaning precisely the same as in the dream-thought I had uncovered?
Thus I had been playing the part of Brutus in the dream. If only I couldﬁnd one other piece of evidence in the content of the dream to conﬁrmthis surprising collateral connecting link! A possible one occurred to me.‘My friend Fl. came to Vienna in July.’ There was no basis in reality for this
detail of the dream. So far as I knew, my friend Fl. had never been in Vi-enna in July. But the month of July was named after Julius Caesar andmight therefore very well represent the allusion I wanted to the interme-diate thought of my playing the part of Brutus.
1
Strange to say, I really did once play the part of Brutus. I once acted
in the scene between Brutus and Caesar from Schiller2before an audience
of children. I was fourteen years old at the time and was acting with anephew who was a year my senior. He had come to us on a visit from En-gland; and he, too, was a revenant, for it was the playmate of my earliest
years who had returned in him. Until the end of my third year we hadbeen inseparable. We had loved each other and fought with each other;and this childhood relationship, as I have already hinted above [pp. 219and 251], had a determining inﬂuence on all my subsequent relationswith contemporaries. Since that time my nephew John has had many re-incarnations which revived now one side and now another of his person-ality, unalterably ﬁxed as it was in my unconscious memory. There musthave been times when he treated me very badly and I must have showncourage in the face of my tyrant; for in my later years I have often beentold of a short speech made by me in my own defence when my father,who was at the same time John’s grandfather, had said to me accusingly:‘Why are you hitting John?’ My reply—I was not yet two years old at thetime—was ‘I hit him ‘cos he hit me.’ It must have been this scene frommy childhood which diverted ‘Non vivit’ into ‘Non vixit,’ for in the lan-
guage of later childhood the word for to hit is ‘wichsen’ [pronounced like
the English ‘vixen’]. The dream-work is not ashamed to make use of linkssuch as this one. There was little basis in reality for my hostility to myfriend P ., who was very greatly my superior and for that reason was wellﬁtted to appear as a new edition of my early playmate. This hostility must433 F . Calculations in Dreams
1 There was the further connection between ‘Caesar’ and ‘Kaiser.’
2 [This is in fact a lyric in dialogue form recited by Karl Moor in Act IV, Scene 5,
of the earlier version of Schiller’s play Die Räuber. ]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 433therefore certainly have gone back to my complicated childhood relations
to John. [See further pp. 488.]1
As I have said, I shall return to this dream later.
(G)
ABSURD DREAMS—INTELLECTUAL 
ACTIVITY IN DREAMS2
In the course of our dream-interpretations we have so often come
across the element of absurdity that we cannot postpone any longer themoment of investigating its source and signiﬁcance, if it has any. For itwill be remembered that the absurdity of dreams has provided those whodeny the value of dreams with one of their principal arguments in favourof regarding them as the meaningless product of a reduced and fragmen-tary mental activity [see pp. 84 ff.].
I shall begin by giving a few examples in which the absurdity is only
an apparent one and disappears as soon as the meaning of the dream ismore closely examined. Here are two or three dreams which deal (bychance, as it may seem at ﬁrst sight) with the dreamer’s dead father.
i
This is the dream of a patient who had lost his father six years earlier.
His father had met with a grave calamity. He had been travelling by the nighttrain, which had been derailed. The carriage seats were forced together and434 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Freud discusses his relations with his nephew John in a letter to Fliess of Octo-
ber 3, 1897. (Freud, 1950a, Letter 70.) A further, somewhat disguised account
of an early episode, in which John and his younger sister Pauline (referred to be-low on p. 491) ﬁgured, is no doubt to be seen in the latter part of Freud’s paperon ‘Screen Memories’ (1899 a).—The subject of speeches in dreams is also men-
tioned on pp. 207, 321, 329 and 471.]
2 [Henceforward, until the end of the book, it is to be assumed once more that the
whole of the matter appeared in the ﬁrst (1900) edition, except for passages towhich a later date is speciﬁcally assigned.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 434his head was compressed from side to side. The dreamer then saw him lying
in bed with a wound over his left eyebrow which ran in a vertical direction.He was surprised at his father’s having met with a calamity (since he was al-
ready dead, as he added in telling me the dream). How clear his eyes were!
According to the ruling theory of dreams we should have to explain the
content of this dream as follows. To begin with, we should suppose, whilethe dreamer was imagining the accident, he must have forgotten that hisfather had been in his grave for several years; but, as the dream proceeded,the recollection must have emerged, and led to his astonishment at hisown dream while he was still asleep. Analysis teaches us, however, that it iseminently useless to look for explanations of this kind. The dreamer hadcommissioned a bust of his father from a sculptor and had seen it for theﬁrst time two days before the dream. It was this that he had thought of asa calamity. The sculptor had never seen his father and had worked fromphotographs. On the day immediately before the dream the dreamer, inhis ﬁlial piety, had sent an old family servant to the studio to see whetherhe would form the same opinion of the marble head, namely, that it wastoo narrow from side to side at the temples. He now proceeded to recallfrom his memory the material which had gone to the construction of thedream. Whenever his father was tormented by business worries or familydifﬁculties, he had been in the habit of pressing his hands to the sides ofhis forehead, as though he felt that his head was too wide and wanted tocompress it.—When the patient was four years old he had been presentwhen a pistol, which had been accidentally loaded, had been dischargedand had blackened his father’s eyes. (‘How clear his eyes were!’ )—At the
spot on his forehead at which the dream located his father’s injury, a deepfurrow showed during his lifetime whenever he was thoughtful or sad. Thefact that this furrow was replaced in the dream by a wound led back to thesecond exciting cause of the dream. The dreamer had taken a photographof his little daughter. The plate had slipped through his ﬁngers, and whenhe picked it up showed a crack which ran perpendicularly down the littlegirl’s forehead as far as her eyebrow. He could not help feeling supersti-tious about this, since a few days before his mother’s death he had brokena photographic plate with her portrait on it.
The absurdity of this dream was thus no more than the result of a piece
of carelessness in verbal expression which failed to distinguish the bust andthe photograph from the actual person. We might any of us say [lookingat a picture]: ‘There’s something wrong with Father, don’t you think?’ Theappearance of absurdity in the dream could easily have been avoided; and435 G. Absurd Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 435if we were to judge from this single example, we should be inclined to
think that the apparent absurdity had been permitted or even designed.
ii
Here is another, almost exactly similar, example from a dream of my
own. (I lost my father in 1896.) After his death my father played a political
part among the Magyars and brought them together politically. Here I saw a
small and indistinct picture: a crowd of men as though they were in the Re-
ichstag; someone standing on one or two chairs, with other people round him.I remembered how like Garibaldi he had looked on his death-bed, and feltglad that that promise had come true.
What could be more absurd than this? It was dreamt at a time at
which the Hungarians had been driven by parliamentary obstruction into
a state of lawlessness and were plunged into the crisis from which theywere rescued by Koloman Széll.
1The trivial detail of the scene in the
dream appearing in pictures of such a small size was not without rele-vance to its interpretation. Our dream-thoughts are usually representedin visual pictures which appear to be more or less life-size. The picturewhich I saw in my dream, however, was a reproduction of a woodcut in-serted in an illustrated history of Austria, which showed Maria Theresa atthe Reichstag [Diet] of Pressburg in the famous episode of ‘ Moriamur pro
rege nostro. ’
2Like Maria Theresa in the picture, so my father stood in the
dream surrounded by the crowd. But he was standing on one or two chairs
[‘chair’ = ‘Stuhl’ ]. He had brought them together, and was thus a presiding
judge [ ‘Stuhlrichter,’ literally ‘chair-judge’]. (A connecting link was pro-
vided by the common [German] phrase ‘we shall need no judge.’)—436 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [An acute political crisis in Hungary in 1898–9 had been solved by the forma-
tion of a coalition government under Széll.]
2 [‘We will die for our king!’ The response of the Hungarian nobles to Maria
Theresa’s plea for support, after her accession in 1740, in the War of the Aus-
trian Succession.]—I cannot remember where I read an account of a dreamwhich was ﬁlled with unusually small ﬁgures, and the source of which turnedout to be one of Jacques Callot’s etchings seen by the dreamer during the day.These etchings do in fact contain a large number of very small ﬁgures. One seriesof them depicts the horrors of the Thirty Years’ War.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 436Those of us who were standing round had in fact remarked how like
Garibaldi my father looked on his death-bed. He had had a post mortem
rise of temperature, his cheeks had been ﬂushed more and more deeplyred. . . . As I recalled this, my thoughts involuntarily ran on:
Und hinter ihm in wesenlosem ScheineLag, was uns alle bändigt, das Gemeine.
1
These elevated thoughts prepared the way [in the analysis] for the ap-
pearance of something that was common [ ‘gemein’ ] in another sense. My
father’s post mortem rise of temperature corresponded to the words ‘after
his death’ in the dream. His most severe suffering had been caused by acomplete paralysis ( obstruction) of the intestines during his last weeks.
Disrespectful thoughts of all kinds followed from this. One of my con-temporaries who lost his father while he was still at his secondaryschool—on that occasion I myself had been deeply moved and had of-fered to be his friend—once told me scornfully of how one of his femalerelatives had had a painful experience. Her father had fallen dead in thestreet and had been brought home; when his body was undressed it wasfound that at the moment of death, or post mortem, he had passed a stool
[‘Stuhl’ ]. His daughter had been so unhappy about this that she could not
prevent this ugly detail from disturbing her memory of her father. Herewe have reached the wish that was embodied in this dream. ‘To stand be-fore one’s children’s eyes, after one’s death, great and unsullied’—whowould not desire this? What has become of the absurdity of the dream?Its apparent absurdity is due only to the fact that it gave a literal pictureof a ﬁgure of speech which is itself perfectly legitimate and in which wehabitually overlook any absurdity involved in the contradiction betweenits parts. In this instance, once again, it is impossible to escape an impres-sion that the apparent absurdity is intentional and has been deliberatelyproduced.
2437 G. Absurd Dreams
1 [These lines are from the Epilogue to Schiller’s ‘Lied von der Glocke’ written by
Goethe a few months after his friend’s death. He speaks of Schiller’s spirit moving
forward into the eternity of truth, goodness and beauty, while ‘behind him, a shad-owy illusion, lay what holds us all in bondage—the things that are common.’]
2 [This dream is further discussed on pp. 455.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 437The frequency with which dead people appear in dreams1and act and
associate with us as though they were alive has caused unnecessary surprise
and has produced some remarkable explanations which throw our lack ofunderstanding of dreams into strong relief. Yet the explanation of thesedreams is a very obvious one. It often happens that we ﬁnd ourselves think-ing: ‘If my father were alive, what would he say to this?’ Dreams are unableto express an ‘if ’ of this kind except by representing the person concernedas present in some particular situation. Thus, for instance, a young manwho had been left a large legacy by his grandfather, dreamt, at a time whenhe was feeling self-reproaches for having spent a considerable sum of money,that his grandfather was alive again and calling him to account. And when,from our better knowledge, we protest that after all the person in questionis dead, what we look upon as a criticism of the dream is in  reality either aconsoling thought that the dead person has not lived to witness the event,or a feeling of satisfaction that he can no longer interfere in it.
There is another kind of absurdity, which occurs in dreams of dead rel-
atives but which does not express ridicule and derision.
2It indicates an
extreme degree of repudiation, and so makes it possible to represent a re-pressed thought which the dreamer would prefer to regard as utterly un-thinkable. It seems impossible to elucidate dreams of this kind unless onebears in mind the fact that dreams do not differentiate between what iswished and what is real. For instance, a man who had nursed his fatherduring his last illness and had been deeply grieved by his death, had thefollowing senseless dream some time afterwards. His father was alive once
more and was talking to him in his usual way, but (the remarkable thing
was that) he had really died, only he did not know it. This dream only be-comes intelligible if, after the words ‘but he had really died’ we insert ‘inconsequence of the dreamer’s wish,’ and if we explain that what ‘he did438 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This paragraph was added as a footnote in 1909 and included in the text in
1930.]
2 [This paragraph was added as a footnote in 1911 and included in the text in
1930. The ﬁrst sentence of the paragraph implies that Freud has already ex-
plained absurdity in dreams as being due to the presence of ‘ridicule and derision’in the dream-thoughts. Actually he has not yet done so, and this conclusion isonly explicitly stated in the paragraph below (on p. 452) in which he sums up histheory of absurd dreams. It seems possible that the present paragraph, in its orig-inal footnote form, may by some oversight have been introduced here instead ofat the later point.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 438not know’ was that the dreamer had had this wish. While he was nursing
his father he had repeatedly wished his father were dead; that is to say, hehad had what was actually a merciful thought that death might put anend to his sufferings. During his mourning, after his father’s death, eventhis sympathetic wish became a subject of unconscious self-reproach, asthough by means of it he had really helped to shorten the sick man’s life.A stirring up of the dreamer’s earliest infantile impulses against his fathermade it possible for this self-reproach to ﬁnd expression as a dream; butthe fact that the instigator of the dream and the daytime thoughts weresuch worlds apart was precisely what necessitated the dream’s absurdity.
1
It is true that dreams of dead people whom the dreamer has loved raise
difﬁcult problems in dream-interpretation and that these cannot always besatisfactorily solved. The reason for this is to be found in the particularlystrongly marked emotional ambivalence which dominates the dreamer’srelation to the dead person. It very commonly happens that in dreams ofthis kind the dead person is treated to begin with as though he were alive,that he then suddenly turns out to be dead and that in a subsequent partof the dream he is alive once more. This has a confusing effect. It eventu-ally occurred to me that this alternation between death and life is intendedto represent indifference on the part of the dreamer. (‘It’s all the same to
me whether he’s alive or dead.’) This indifference is, of course, not real butmerely desired; it is intended to help the dreamer to repudiate his very in-tense and often contradictory emotional attitudes and it thus becomes adream-representation of his ambivalence. —In other dreams in which the
dreamer associates with dead people, the following rule often helps to giveus our bearings. If there is no mention in the dream of the fact that thedead man is dead, the dreamer is equating himself with him: he is dream-ing of his own death. If, in the course of the dream, the dreamer suddenlysays to himself in astonishment, ‘why, he died ever so long ago,’ he is re-pudiating this equation and is denying that the dream signiﬁes his owndeath.
2—But I willingly confess to a feeling that dream-interpretation is
far from having revealed all the secrets of dreams of this character.439 G. Absurd Dreams
1 [Footnote 1911:] Cf. my paper on the two principles of mental functioning
(1911b ) [at the end of which this same dream is discussed.—A very similar dream
is analysed as No. 3 in the twelfth of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916–17).—
The next paragraph was added as a footnote in 1919 and included in the text in
1930.]
2 [This point was ﬁrst made in Freud (1913h).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 439iii
In the example which I shall next bring forward I have been able to
catch the dream-work in the very act of intentionally fabricating an ab-
surdity for which there was absolutely no occasion in the material. It istaken from the dream which arose from my meeting with Count Thun asI was starting for my holidays. [See pp. 229 ff.] I was driving in a cab and
ordered the driver to drive me to a station. ‘Of course I can’t drive with youalong the railway line itself,’ I said, after he had raised some objection, asthough I had overtired him. It was as if I had already driven with him for someof the distance one normally travels by train. The analysis produced the fol-
lowing explanations of this confused and senseless story. The day before, Ihad hired a cab to take me to an out-of-the-way street in Dornbach.
1The
driver, however, had not known where the street was and, as these excellentpeople are apt to do, had driven on and on until at last I had noticed whatwas happening and had told him the right way, adding a few sarcastic com-ments. A train of thought, to which I was later in the analysis to return,led from this cab-driver to aristocrats. For the moment it was merely thepassing notion that what strikes us bourgeois plebs about the aristocracy isthe preference they have for taking the driver’s seat. Count Thun, indeed,was the driver of the State Coach of Austria. The next sentence in thedream, however, referred to my brother, whom I was thus identifying withthe cab-driver. That year I had called off a trip I was going to make withhim to Italy. (‘ I can’t drive with you along the railway line itself.’ ) And this
cancellation had been a kind of punishment for the complaints he used tomake that I was in the habit of over-tiring him on such trips (this appearedin the dream unaltered) by insisting upon moving too rapidly from placeto place and seeing too many beautiful things in a single day. On theevening of the dream my brother had accompanied me to the station; buthe had jumped out shortly before we got there, at the suburban railway sta-tion adjoining the main line terminus, in order to travel to Purkersdorf
2
by the suburban line. I had remarked to him that he might have stayedwith me a little longer by travelling to Purkersdorf by the main line insteadof the suburban one. This led to the passage in the dream in which I drovein the cab for some of the distance one normally travels by train. This was an440 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [On the outskirts of Vienna.]
2 [Seven or eight miles outside Vienna.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 440inversion of what had happened in reality—a kind of ‘ tu quoque’ argument
What I had said to my brother was: ‘you can travel on the main line in my
company for the distance you would travel by the suburban line.’ Ibrought about the whole confusion in the dream by putting ‘cab’ insteadof ‘suburban line’ (which, incidentally, was of great help in bringing to-gether the ﬁgures of the cab-driver and my brother). In this way I suc-ceeded in producing something senseless in the dream, which it seemsscarcely possible to disentangle and which was almost a direct contradic-tion of an earlier remark of mine in the dream (‘I can’t drive with you alongthe railway line itself ’ ). Since, however, there was no necessity whatever for
me to confuse the suburban railway and a cab, I must have arranged thewhole of this enigmatic business in the dream on purpose.
But for what purpose? We are now to discover the signiﬁcance of ab-
surdity in dreams and the motives which lead to its being admitted or evencreated. The solution of the mystery in the present dream was as follows.It was necessary for me that there should be something absurd and unin-telligible in this dream in connection with the word ‘fahren ’
1because the
dream-thoughts included a particular judgement which called for repre-sentation. One evening, while I was at the house of the hospitable andwitty lady who appeared as the ‘housekeeper’ in one of the other scenes inthe same dream, I had heard two riddles which I had been unable to solve.Since they were familiar to the rest of the company, I cut a rather ludicrousﬁgure in my vain attempts to ﬁnd the answers. They depended upon punson the words ‘Nachkommen’ and ‘Vorfahren’ and, I believe, ran as follows:
Der Herr beﬁehlt’s,Der Kutscher tut’s.Ein jeder hat’s,Im Grabe ruht’s.
[With the master’s request
The driver complies:By all men possessedIn the graveyard it lies.]441 G. Absurd Dreams
1 [The German word ‘fahren, ’ which has already been used repeatedly in the dream
and the analysis, is used for the English ‘drive’ (in a cab) and ‘travel’ (in a train)
and has had to be translated by both of those words in different contexts. Seealso p. 231 n.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 441(Answer: ‘Vorfahrer’ [‘Drive up’ and ‘Ancestry’; more literally ‘go in front’
and ‘predecessors’].)
It was particularly confusing that the ﬁrst half of the second riddle was
identical with that of the ﬁrst:
Der Herr beﬁehlt’s,
Der Kutscher tut’s.Nicht jeder hat’s,In der Wiege ruht’s.
[With the master’s request
The driver complies:Not by all men possessedIn the cradle it lies.]
(Answer: ‘Nachkommen’ [‘Follow after’ and ‘Progeny’; more literally ‘come
after’ and ‘successors’].)
When I saw Count Thun drive up so impressively and when I there-
upon fell into the mood of Figaro, with his remarks on the goodness ofgreat gentlemen in having taken the trouble to be born (to become prog-
eny), these two riddles were adopted by the dream-work as intermediate
thoughts. Since aristocrats could easily be confused with drivers and sincethere was a time in our part of the world when a driver was spoken of as‘Schwager’ [‘coachman’ and ‘brother-in-law’], the work of condensation
was able to introduce my brother into the same picture. The dream-thought, however, which was operating behind all this ran as follows: ‘Itis absurd to be proud of one’s ancestry; it is better to be an ancestor one-self.’ This judgement, that something ‘is absurd,’ was what produced theabsurdity in the dream. And this also clears up the remaining enigma inthis obscure region of the dream, namely why it was that I thought I hadalready driven with the driver before [vorhergefahren (‘driven before’)—
vorgefahren (‘driven up’)— ‘Vorfahren’ (‘ancestry’)].
A dream is made absurd, then, if a judgement that something ‘is absurd’
is among the elements included in the dream-thoughts—that is to say, ifany one of the dreamer’s unconscious trains of thought has criticism or rid-icule as its motive. Absurdity is accordingly one of the methods by whichthe dream-work represents a contradiction—alongside such other methodsas the reversal in the dream-content of some material relation in the dream-442 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 442thoughts [pp. 341 f.], or the exploitation of the sensation of motor inhibi-
tion [pp. 351 f.]. Absurdity in a dream, however, is not to be translated bya simple ‘no’; it is intended to reproduce the mood of the dream-thoughts,
which combines derision or laughter with the contradiction. It is only withsuch an aim in view that the dream-work produces anything ridiculous.Here once again it is giving a manifest form to a portion of the latent content.
1
Actually we have already come across a convincing example of an ab-
surd dream with this kind of meaning: the dream—I interpreted it with-out any analysis—of the performance of a Wagner opera which lasted tilla quarter to eight in the morning and in which the orchestra was con-ducted from a tower, and so on (see pp. 356 f.). It evidently meant to say:‘This is a topsy-turvy world and a crazy society; the person who deserves
something doesn’t get it, and the person who doesn’t care about some-thing does get it’—and there the dreamer was comparing her fate with her
cousin’s.—Nor is it by any means a matter of chance that our ﬁrst exam-ples of absurdity in dreams related to a dead father. In such cases, the con-ditions for creating absurd dreams are found together in characteristicfashion. The authority wielded by a father provokes criticism from hischildren at an early age, and the severity of the demands he makes uponthem leads them, for their own relief, to keep their eyes open to anyweakness of their father’s; but the ﬁlial piety called up in our minds bythe ﬁgure of a father, particularly after his death, tightens the censorshipwhich prohibits any such criticism from being consciously expressed.443 G. Absurd Dreams
1 The dream-work is thus parodying the thought that has been presented to it as
something ridiculous, by the method of creating something ridiculous in connec-
tion with that thought. Heine adopted the same line when he wanted to ridiculesome wretched verses written by the King of Bavaria. He did so in still morewretched ones:
Herr Ludwig ist ein grosser Poet,Und singt er, so stürzt ApolloVor ihm auf die Kniee und bittet und ﬂeht,‘Halt ein! ich werde sonst toll, o!’
[Sir Ludwig is a magniﬁcent bard
And, as soon as he utters, ApolloGoes down on his knees and begs him: ‘Hold hard!Or I’ll shortly become a clod-poll oh!’
Lobgesänge auf König Ludwig, I.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 443iv
Here is another absurd dream about a dead father. I received a commu-
nication from the town council of my birthplace concerning the fees due for
someone’s maintenance in the hospital in the year 1851, which had been ne-
cessitated by an attack he had had in my house. I was amused by this since,in the ﬁrst place, I was not yet alive in 1851 and, in the second place, my fa-
ther, to whom it might have related, was already dead. I went to him in thenext room, where he was lying on his bed, and told him about it. To my sur-prise, he recollected that in 1851 he had once got drunk and had had to belocked up or detained. It was at a time at which he had been working for theﬁrm of T——. ‘So you used to drink as well?’ I asked; ‘did you get marriedsoon after that?’ I calculated that, of course, I was born in 1856, which
seemed to be the year which immediately followed the year in question.
We should conclude from the preceding discussion that the insistence
with which this dream exhibited its absurdities could only be taken as indi-cating the presence in the dream-thoughts of a particularly embittered andpassionate polemic. We shall therefore be all the more astonished to observethat in this dream the polemic was carried on in the open and that my fatherwas the explicit object of the ridicule. Openness of this kind seems to con-tradict our assumptions as regards the working of the censorship in connec-tion with the dream-work. The position will become clearer, however, whenit is realized that in this instance my father was merely put forward as ashow-ﬁgure, and that the dispute was really being carried on with someoneelse, who only appeared in the dream in a single allusion. Whereas normallya dream deals with rebellion against someone else, behind whom thedreamer’s father is concealed, the opposite was true here. My father wasmade into a man of straw, in order to screen someone else; and the dreamwas allowed to handle in this undisguised way a ﬁgure who was as a ruletreated as sacred, because at the same time I knew with certainty that it wasnot he who was really meant. That this was so was shown by the excitingcause of the dream. For it occurred after I had heard that a senior colleagueof mine, whose judgement was regarded as beyond criticism, had given voiceto disapproval and surprise at the fact that the psycho-analytic treatment ofone of my patients had already entered its ﬁfth year.
1The ﬁrst  sentences of444 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This was the patient frequently referred to in Freud’s letters to Fliess (Freud,
1950a ) as ‘E.’ The present dream is referred to in Letter 126 (December 21, 1899)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 444the dream alluded under a transparent disguise to the fact that for some time
this colleague had taken over the duties which my father could no longerfulﬁl (‘fees due, ’ ‘maintenance in the hospital’ ), and that, when our relations
began to be less friendly, I became involved in the same kind of emotionalconﬂict which, when a misunderstanding arises between a father and son, isinevitably produced owing to the position occupied by the father and theassistance formerly given by him. The dream-thoughts protested bitterlyagainst the reproach that I was not getting on faster—a reproach which, ap-plying ﬁrst to my treatment of the patient, extended later to other things.Did he know anyone, I thought, who could get on more quickly? Was henot aware that, apart from my methods of treatment, conditions of thatkind are altogether incurable and last a lifetime? What were four or ﬁve yearsin comparison with a whole life-time, especially considering that the pa-tient’s existence had been so very much eased during the treatment?
A great part of the impression of absurdity in this dream was brought
about by running together sentences from different parts of the dream-thoughts without any transition. Thus the sentence ‘I went to him in thenext room,’ etc., dropped the subject with which the preceding sentenceshad been dealing and correctly reproduced the circumstances in which Iinformed my father of my having become engaged to be married withoutconsulting him. This sentence was therefore reminding me of the ad-mirable unselﬁshness displayed by the old man on that occasion, andcontrasting it with the behaviour of someone else—of yet another person.It is to be observed that the dream was allowed to ridicule my father be-cause in the dream-thoughts he was held up in unqualiﬁed admiration asa model to other people. It lies in the very nature of every censorship thatof forbidden things it allows those which are untrue to be said rather than
those which are true. The next sentence, to the effect that he recollected
‘having once got drunk and been locked up for it’ was no longer concerned
with anything that related to my father in reality. Here the ﬁgure forwhom he stood was no less a person than the great Meynert,
1in whose
footsteps I had trodden with such deep veneration and whose behaviourtowards me, after a short period of favour, had turned to undisguised hos-tility. The dream reminded me that he himself had told me that at one445 G. Absurd Dreams
and the very satisfactory termination of the treatment is announced in Letter 133
(April 16, 1900).]
1 [Theodor Meynert (1833–1892) had been Professor of Psychiatry at the Vienna
University.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 445time in his youth he had indulged in the habit of making himself intoxi-
cated with chloroform and that on account of it he had had to go into a
home. It also reminded me of another incident with him shortly before
his death. I had carried on an embittered controversy with him in writ-
ing, on the subject of male hysteria, the existence of which he denied.1
When I visited him during his fatal illness and asked after his condition,he spoke at some length about his state and ended with these words: ‘Youknow, I was always one of the clearest cases of male hysteria.’ He was thusadmitting, to my satisfaction and astonishment, what he had for so longobstinately contested. But the reason why I was able in this scene of thedream to use my father as a screen for Meynert did not lie in any analogythat I had discovered between the two ﬁgures. The scene was a concisebut entirely adequate representation of a conditional sentence in thedream-thoughts, which ran in full: ‘If only I had been the second gener-ation, the son of a professor or Hofrat, I should certainly have got on
faster.’ In the dream I made my father into a Hofrat and professor.—The
most blatant and disturbing absurdity in the dream resides in its treat-ment of the date 1851, which seemed to me not to differ from 1856, just
as though a difference of ﬁve years was of no signiﬁcance whatever. But this
last was precisely what the dream-thoughts sought to express. Four or ﬁve
years was the length of time during which I enjoyed the support of the
colleague whom I mentioned earlier in this analysis; but it was also thelength of time during which I made my ﬁancée wait for our marriage; and
it was also, by a chance coincidence which was eagerly exploited by thedream-thoughts, the length of time during which I made my patient oflongest standing wait for a complete recovery. ‘What are ﬁve years?’ askedthe dream-thoughts; ‘that’s no time at all, so far as I’m concerned; it doesn’tcount. I have time enough in front of me. And just as I succeeded in the
end in that, though you would not believe it, so I shall achieve this, too.’
Apart from this, however, the number 51 by itself, without the numberof the century, was determined in another, and indeed, in an oppositesense; and this, too, is why it appeared in the dream several times. 51 isthe age which seems to be a particularly dangerous one to men; I haveknown colleagues who have died suddenly at that age, and amongst them446 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This controversy is described in some detail in the ﬁrst chapter of Freud’s Auto-
biographical Study (1925d ).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 446one who, after long delays, had been appointed to a pro fessorship only a
few days before his death.1
v
Here is yet another absurd dream which plays about with numbers.
One of my acquaintances, Herr M., had been attacked in an essay with an un-justiﬁable degree of violence, as we all thought— by no less a person than
Goethe. Herr M. was naturally crushed by the attack. He complained of it bit-terly to some company at table; his veneration for Goethe had not been affected,however, by this personal experience. I tried to throw a little light on thechronological data, which seemed to me improbable. Goethe died in 1832.Since his attack on Herr M. must naturally have been made earlier than that,Herr M. must have been quite a young man at the time. It seemed to be aplausible notion that he was eighteen. I was not quite sure, however, what yearwe were actually in, so that my whole calculation melted into obscurity. Inci-dentally, the attack was contained in Goethe’s well-known essay on ‘Nature.’
We shall quickly ﬁnd means of justifying the nonsense in this dream.
Herr M., whom I had got to know among some company at table, had not
long before asked me to examine his brother, who was showing signs ofgeneral paralysis. The suspicion was correct; on the occasion of this visit an
awkward episode occurred, for in the course of his conversation the patientfor no accountable reason gave his brother away by talking of his youthful
follies. I had asked the patient the year of his birth and made him do sev-
eral small sums so as to test the weakness of his memory—though, inci-dentally, he was still able to meet the tests quite well. I could already seethat I myself behaved like a paralytic in the dream. ( I was not quite sure
what year we were in. ) Another part of the material of the dream was de-
rived from another recent source. The editor of a medical journal, withwhom I was on friendly terms, had printed a highly unfavourable, a ‘crush-
ing’ criticism of my Berlin friend Fl.’s [Fliess’s] last book. The criticism447 G. Absurd Dreams
1 [This is no doubt a reference to Fliess’s theory of periodicity. 51 = 28 + 23, the
male and female periods respectively. Cf. Sec tions I and IV of Kris’s introduction
to Freud’s correspondence with Fliess (Freud, 1950 a). See also above, pp. 192 ff.—
The fact that the number 51 occurs several times is referred to on p. 517. Theanalysis of the dream is continued below on pp. 457 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 447had been written by a very youthful reviewer who possessed small judge-
ment. I thought I had a right to intervene and took the editor to task over
it. He expressed lively regret at having published the criticism but wouldnot undertake to offer any redress. I therefore severed my connection withthe journal, but in my letter of resignation expressed a hope that our per-
sonal relations would not be affected by the event. The third source of the
dream was an account I had just heard from a woman patient of herbrother’s mental illness, and of how he had broken out in a frenzy withcries of ‘Naturel Nature!’ The doctors believed that his exclamation came
from his having read Goethe’s striking essay on that subject and that it
showed he had been overworking at his studies in natural philosophy. Imyself preferred to think of the sexual sense in which the word is usedeven by the less educated people here. This idea of mine was at least notdisproved by the fact that the unfortunate young man subsequently muti-lated his own genitals. He was eighteen at the time of his outbreak.
I may add that my friend’s book which had been so severely criticized
(‘one wonders whether it is the author or oneself who is crazy,’ anotherreviewer had said) dealt with the chronological data of life and showed that
the length of Goethe’s life was a multiple of a number [of days] that has a
signiﬁcance in biology. So it is easy to see that in the dream I was puttingmyself in my friend’s place. ( I tried to throw a little light on the chronolog-
ical data. ) But I behaved like a paralytic, and the dream was a mass of ab-
surdities. Thus the dream-thoughts were saying ironically: ‘Naturally, it’s
he [my friend F .] who is the crazy fool, and it’s you [the critics] who are
the men of genius and know better. Surely it can’t by any chance be thereverse?’ There were plenty of examples of this reversal in the dream. For
instance, Goethe attacked the young man, which is absurd, whereas it isstill easy for quite a young man to attack Goethe, who is immortal. Andagain, I calculated from the year of Goethe’s death, where as I had made
the paralytic calculate from the year of his birth. [See p. 342, where this
dream has already been mentioned.]
But I have also undertaken to show that no dream is prompted by mo-
tives other than egoistic ones. [See pp. 285 ff.] So I must explain away thefact that in the present dream I made my friend’s cause my own and putmyself in his place. The strength of my critical conviction in waking lifeis not enough to account for this. The story of the eighteen-year-old pa-tient, however, and the different interpretations of his exclaiming ‘Na-ture!’ were allusions to the opposition in which I found myself to most
doctors on account of my belief in the sexual aetiology of the psychoneu-448 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 448roses. I could say to myself: ‘The kind of criticism that has been applied
to your friend will be applied to you—indeed, to some extent it alreadyhas been.’ The ‘he’ in the dream can therefore be replaced by ‘we’: ‘Yes,
you’re quite right, it’s we who are the fools.’ There was a very clear re-
minder in the dream that ‘mea res agitur,’ in the allusion to Goethe’s short
but exquisitely written essay; for when at the end of my school-days I washesitating in my choice of a career, it was hearing that essay read aloud ata public lecture that decided me to take up the study of natural science.
1
vi
Earlier in this volume I undertook to show that another dream in
which my own ego did not appear was nevertheless egoistic. On p. 286 Ireported a short dream to the effect that Professor M. said: ‘My son, the
 Myops . . . ,’ and I explained that the dream was only an introductory one,preliminary to another in which I did play a part. Here is the missing
main dream, which introduces an absurd and unintelligible verbal formwhich requires an explanation.
On account of certain events which had occurred in the city of Rome, it
had become necessary to remove the children to safety, and this was done. Thescene was then in front of a gateway, double doors in the ancient style (the‘Porta Romana’ at Siena, as I was aware during the dream itself ). I was sit-ting on the edge of a fountain and was greatly depressed and almost in tears.A female ﬁgure—an attendant or nun —brought two boys out and handed
them over to their father, who was not myself. The elder of the two was clearlymy eldest son; I did not see the other one’s face. The woman who brought outthe boy asked him to kiss her good-bye. She was noticeable for having a rednose. The boy refused to kiss her, but, holding out his hand in farewell, said‘Auf Geseres’ to her, and then ‘Auf Ungeseres ’ to the two of us (or to one
of us). I had a notion that this last phrase denoted a preference.
2
This dream was constructed on a tangle of thoughts provoked by a play
which I had seen, called Das neue Ghetto [The New Ghetto ]. The Jewish449 G. Absurd Dreams
1 [This dream is further discussed on pp. 456 f.; it is also analysed at length, and
with a few additional details, in Part VI of Freud’s short study On Dreams
(1901a ), Standard Ed., 5,662—An English translation of Goethe’s ‘Fragment
über die Natur’ will be found in Wittels, 1931, 31.]
2 [The words ‘Geseres’ and ‘Ungeseres,’ neither of them German, are discussed below.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 449problem, concern about the future of one’s children, to whom one cannot
give a country of their own, concern about educating them in such a waythat they can move freely across frontiers—all of this was easily recogniza-ble among the relevant dream-thoughts.
‘By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept.’ Siena, like Rome, is fa-
mous for its beautiful fountains. If Rome occurred in one of my dreams,it was necessary for me to ﬁnd a substitute for it from some locality knownto me (see pp. 215 f.). Near the Porta Romana in Siena we had seen a largeand brightly lighted building. We learned that it was the Manicomio, the
insane asylum. Shortly before I had the dream I had heard that a man ofthe same religious persuasion as myself had been obliged to resign the po-sition which he had painfully achieved in a State asylum.
Our interest is aroused by the phrase ‘ Auf Geseres’ (at a point at which
the situation in the dream would have led one to expect ‘Auf Wiedersehen’ )
as well as its quite meaningless opposite ‘Auf Ungeseres. ’ According to in-
formation I have received from philologists, ‘Geseres’ is a genuine Hebrew
word derived from a verb ‘goiser,’ and is best translated by ‘imposed suffer-
ings’ or ‘doom.’ The use of the word in slang would incline one to supposethat it meant ‘weeping and wailing.’ ‘Ungeseres’ was a private neologism of
my own and was the ﬁrst word to catch my attention, but to begin with Icould make nothing of it. But the short remark at the end of the dream tothe effect that ‘Ungeseres’ denoted a preference over ‘Geseres’ opened the
door to associations and at the same time to an elucidation of the word.An analogous relationship occurs in the case of caviare; unsalted [‘unge-
salzen’ ] caviare is esteemed more highly than salted [‘gesalzen’ ]. ‘Caviare to
the general,’ aristocratic pretensions; behind this lay a joking allusion to amember of my household who, since she was younger than I, would, Ihoped, look after my children in the future. This tallied with the fact thatanother member of my household, our excellent nurse, was rec ognizablyportrayed in the female attendant or nun in the dream. There was still,however, no transitional idea between ‘salted— unsalted’ and ‘Geseres—
Ungeseres.’ This was provided by ‘leavened —unleavened’ [‘gesäuert—
 ungesäuert’ ]. In their ﬂight out of Egypt the Children of Israel had not
time to allow their dough to rise and, in memory of this, they eat unleav-
ened bread to this day at Easter. At this point I may insert a sudden associ-ation that occurred to me during this portion of the analysis. I rememberedhow, during the previous Easter, my Berlin friend and I had been walkingthrough the streets of Breslau, a town in which we were strangers. A littlegirl asked me the way to a particular street, and I was obliged to confess that450 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 450I did not know; and I remarked to my friend: ‘It is to be hoped that when
she grows up that little girl will show more discrimination in her choice ofthe people whom she gets to direct her.’ Shortly afterwards, I caught sightof a door-plate bearing the words ‘Dr. Herodes. Consulting hours: . . .’ ‘Letus hope,’ I remarked, ‘that our colleague does not happen to be a children’sdoctor.’ At this same time my friend had been telling me his views on thebiological signiﬁcance of bilateral sym metry and had begun a sentence with
the words ‘If we had an eye in the middle of our foreheads like a Cyclops .. .’ This led to the Professor’s remark in the introductory dream, ‘My son,
the Myops . . .’
1and I had now been led to the principal source of ‘Geseres.’
Many years before, when this son of Professor M.’s, today an independentthinker, was still sitting at his school-desk, he was attacked by a disease ofthe eyes which, the doctor declared, gave cause for anxiety. He explainedthat so long as it remained on one side it was of no importance, but that if it
passed over to the other eye it would be a serious matter. The affectioncleared up completely in the one eye; but shortly afterwards signs in fact ap-peared of the other one being affected. The boy’s mother, terriﬁed, at oncesent for the doctor to the remote spot in the country where they were stay-ing. The doctor, however, now went over to the other side. ‘Why are you
making such a “Geseres”?’ he shouted at the mother, ‘if one side has got well,
so will the other.’ And he was right.
And now we must consider the relation of all this to me and my fam-
ily. The school-desk at which Professor M.’s son took his ﬁrst steps inknowledge was handed over by his mother as a gift to my eldest son, intowhose mouth I put the farewell phrases in the dream. It is easy to guessone of the wishes to which this transference gave rise. But the construc-tion of the desk was also intended to save the child from being short-
sighted and one-sided. Hence the appearance in the dream of ‘Myops’ (and,
behind it, ‘Cyclops’ ) and the reference to bilaterality. My concern about
one-sidedness had more than one meaning: it could refer not only tophysical one-sidedness but also to one-sidedness of intellectual develop-ment. May it not even be that it was precisely this concern which, in itscrazy way, the scene in the dream was contradicting? After the child hadturned to one side to say farewell words, he turned to the other side to say
the contrary, as though to restore the balance. It was as though he was act-
ing with due attention to bilateral symmetry!451 G. Absurd Dreams
1 [The German ‘Myop’ is an ad hoc form constructed on the pattern of ‘Zyklop.’ ]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 451Dreams, then, are often most profound when they seem most crazy. In
every epoch of history those who have had something to say but could not
say it without peril have eagerly assumed a fool’s cap. The audience atwhom their forbidden speech was aimed tolerated it more easily if theycould at the same time laugh and ﬂatter themselves with the reﬂection thatthe unwelcome words were clearly nonsensical. The Prince in the play,who had to disguise himself as a madman, was behaving just as dreams doin reality; so that we can say of dreams what Hamlet said of himself, con-cealing the true circumstances under a cloak of wit and unintelligibility: ‘Iam but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly, I know a hawkfrom a hand-saw!’
1
Thus I have solved the problem of absurdity in dreams by showing that
the dream-thoughts are never absurd—never, at all events, in the dreamsof sane people—and that the dream-work produces absurd dreams anddreams containing individual absurd elements if it is faced with the neces-sity of representing any criticism, ridicule or de rision which may be pres-ent in the dream-thoughts.
2
My next task is to show that the dream-work consists in nothing more
than a combination of the three factors I have mentioned3—and of a
fourth which I have still to mention [see p. 493]; that it carries out noother function than the translation of dream-thoughts in accordance withthe four conditions to which it is subject; and that the question whetherthe mind operates in dreams with all its intellectual faculties or with onlya part of them is wrongly framed and disregards the facts. Since, however,452 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Hamlet, II, 2.] This dream also provides a good example of the generally valid
truth that dreams which occur during the same night, even though they are rec-
ollected as separate, spring from the ground-work of the same thoughts. [Seeabove, pp. 348 f.] In cidentally, the situation in the dream of my removing mychildren to safety from the City of Rome was distorted by being related back toan analogous event that occurred in my own childhood: I was envying some rel-atives who, many years earlier, had had an opportunity of removing their chil-dren to another country.
2 [The subject of absurdity in dreams is also discussed in the course of Chapter VI
of Freud’s book on jokes (1905 c).—Towards the end of Section I of the case his-
tory of the ‘Rat Man’ (1909 d), Freud remarks in a footnote that the same mech-
anism is used in obsessional neuroses.]
3 [Viz. condensation, displacement and consideration for representability.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 452there are plenty of dreams in whose content judgements are passed, criti-
cisms made, and appreciations expressed, in which surprise is felt at someparticular element of the dream, in which explanations are attempted andargumentations embarked upon, I must now proceed to meet the objec-tions arising from facts of this kind by producing some chosen examples.
My reply [put brieﬂy] is as follows: Everything that appears in dreams
as the ostensible activity of the function of judgement is to be regarded not asan intellectual achievement of the dream-work but as belonging to the mate-rial of the dream-thoughts and as having been lifted from them into the man-ifest content of the dream as a ready-made structure. I can even carry thisassertion further. Even the judgements made after waking upon a dream
that has been remembered, and the feelings called up in us by the repro-duction of such a dream, form part, to a great extent, of the latent con-tent of the dream and are to be included in its interpretation.
i
I have already quoted a striking example of this [p. 347 f.]1A woman
patient refused to tell me a dream of hers because ‘it was not clearenough.’ She had seen someone in the dream but did not know whetherit was her husband or her father. There then followed a second piece ofdream in which a dust-bin [ Misttrügerl ] appeared, and this gave rise to
the following recollection. When she had ﬁrst set up house she had jok-ingly remarked on one occasion in the presence of a young relative whowas visiting in the house that her next job was to get hold of a new dust-bin. The next morning one arrived for her, but it was ﬁlled with lilies ofthe valley. This piece of the dream served to represent a common [Ger-man] phrase ‘not grown on my own manure.’
2When the analysis was
completed, it turned out that the dream-thoughts were concerned withthe after-effects of a story, which the dreamer had heard when she wasyoung, of how a girl had had a baby and of how it was not clear who the
father really was. Here, then, the dream-representation had overﬂowed453 G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams
1 [Another example was also quoted in the same passage, p. 347.]
2 [‘Nicht auf meinem eigenen Mist gewachsen’ —meaning ‘I am not responsible for
that,’ or ‘It’s not my baby.’ The German word ‘Mist,’ properly meaning manure,
is used in slang for ‘rubbish’ and occurs in this sense in the Viennese term for a
dust-bin: ‘Misttrügerl.’ ]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 453into the waking thoughts: one of the elements of the dream-thoughts had
found representation in a waking judgement passed upon the dream as awhole.
ii
Here is a similar case. One of my patients had a dream which struck
him as interesting, for immediately after waking he said to himself: ‘Imust tell the doctor that.’ The dream was analysed and produced the clear-est allusions to a liaison which he had started during the treatment and
which he had decided to himself not to tell me about.
1
iii
Here is a third example, one from my own experience. I was going to
the hospital with P . through a district in which there were houses and gar-dens. At the same time I had a notion that I had often seen this district beforein dreams. I did not know my way about very well. He showed me a roadthat led round the corner to a restaurant (indoors, not a garden ). There I
asked for Frau Doni and was told that she lived at the back in a small roomwith three children. I went towards it, but before I got there met an indistinctﬁgure with my two little girls; I took them with me after I had stood withthem for a little while. Some sort of reproach against my wife, for having leftthem there.
When I woke up I had a feeling of great satisfaction, the reason for
which I explained to myself as being that I was going to discover from thisanalysis the meaning of ‘I’ve dreamt of that before.’
1In fact, however, the
analysis taught me nothing of the kind; what it did show me was that thesatisfaction belonged to the latent content of the dream and not to anyjudgement upon it. My satisfaction was with the fact that my marriage hadbrought me children. P . was a person whose course in life lay for some time454 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [See above, pp. 353 f.] A protracted discussion on this subject has run through
recent volumes of the Revue Philosophique [1896–98] under the title of
‘Paramnesia in Dreams’.—[This dream is referred to again on pp. 483 f.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 454alongside mine, who then outdistanced me both socially and materially,
but whose marriage was childless. The two events which occasioned thedream will serve, instead of a complete analysis, to indicate its meaning.The day before, I had read in a newspaper the announcement of the deathof Frau Dona A——y (which I turned into ‘Doni’ in the dream), who haddied in childbirth. My wife told me that the dead woman had been lookedafter by the same midwife who had attended her at the birth of our twoyoungest children. The name ‘Dona’ had struck me because I had met itfor the ﬁrst time a short while before in an English novel. The second oc-casion for the dream was provided by the date on which it occurred. It wason the night before the birthday of my eldest boy—who seems to havesome poetic gifts.
iv
I was left with the same feeling of satisfaction when I woke from the
absurd dream of my father having played a political part among the Mag-yars after his death; and the reason I gave myself for this feeling was thatit was a continuation of the feeling that accompanied the last piece of thedream. [See p. 436.] I remembered how like Garibaldi he had looked on hisdeath-bed and felt glad that it had come true. . . . (There was a continuation
which I had forgotten). The analysis enabled me to ﬁll in this gap in the
dream. It was a mention of my second son, to whom I had given the ﬁrstname of a great historical ﬁgure [Cromwell] who had powerfully attractedme in my boyhood, especially since my visit to England. During the yearbefore the child’s birth I had made up my mind to use this name if itwere a son and I greeted the new-born baby with it with a feeling of highsatisfaction. (It is easy to see how the suppressed megalomania of fathers
is transferred in their thoughts on to their children, and it seems quiteprobable that this is one of the ways in which the suppression of that feel-ing, which becomes necessary in actual life, is carried out.) The littleboy’s right to appear in the context of this dream was derived from thefact that he had just had the same misadventure—easily forgivable bothin a child and in a dying man—of soiling his bedclothes. Compare in thisconnection Stuhlrichter [‘presiding judge,’ literally ‘chair-’ or ‘stool-
judge’] and the wish expressed in the dream to stand before one’s chil-dren’s eyes great and unsullied. [See below, p. 483.]455 G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 455v
I now turn to consider expressions of judgement passed in the dream
itself but not continued into waking life or transposed into it. In looking
for examples of these, my task will be greatly assisted if I may make use ofdreams which I have already recorded with other aims in view. The dreamof Goethe’s attack on Herr M. [pp. 447 ff.] appears to contain a wholenumber of acts of judgement. ‘ I tried to throw a little light on the chrono-
logical data, which seemed to me improbable.’ This has every appear ance ofbeing a criticism of the absurd idea that Goethe should have made a liter-ary attack on a young man of my acquaintance. ‘It seemed to be a plausible
notion that he was eighteen.’ This, again, sounds exactly like the outcome
of a calculation, though, it is true, of a feeble-minded one. Lastly, ‘ Iw a s
not quite sure what year we were in’ seems like an instance of uncertainty or
doubt in a dream.
Thus all of these seemed to be acts of judgement made for the ﬁrst
time in the dream. But analysis showed that their wording can be takenin another way, in the light of which they become indispensable for thedream’s interpretation, while at the same time every trace of absurdity isremoved. The sentence ‘I tried to throw a little light on the chronologicaldata’ put me in the place of my friend [Fliess] who was in fact seeking to
throw light on the chronological data of life. This deprives the sentenceof its signiﬁcance as a judgement protesting against the absurdity of thepreceding sentences. The interpolated phrase, ‘which seemed to me im-
probable, ’ belonged with the subsequent one, ‘It seemed to be a plausible
notion. ’ I had used almost these precise words to the lady who had told
her brother’s case-history. ‘It seems to me an improbable notion that his
cries of “Nature! Nature!” had anything to do with Goethe; it seems to me
far more plausible that the words had the sexual meaning you are familiarwith.’ It is true that here a judgement was passed—not in the dream,however, but in reality, and on an occasion which was recollected and ex-ploited by the dream-thoughts. The content of the dream took over thisjudgement just like any other fragment of the dream-thoughts. The num-ber ‘18’ to which the judgement in the dream was senselessly attached,retains a trace of the real context from which the judgement was torn.Lastly, ‘ I was not quite sure what year we were in’ was intended merely to
carry further my identiﬁcation with the paralytic patient in my examina-tion of whom this point had really arisen.456 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 456The resolution of what are ostensibly acts of judgement in dreams may
serve to remind us of the rules laid down at the beginning of this book [pp.
129 f.] for carrying out the work of interpretation: namely, that we shoulddisregard the apparent coherence between a dream’s constituents as anunessential illusion, and that we should trace back the origin of each of itselements on its own account. A dream is a conglomerate which, for pur-poses of investigation, must be broken up once more into fragments. [Cf.p. 428 f.] On the other hand, however, it will be observed that a psychicalforce is at work in dreams which creates this apparent connectedness,which, that is to say, submits the material produced by the dream-work toa ‘secondary revision.’ This brings us face to face with the manifestationsof a force whose importance we shall later [pp. 493 ff.] assess as the fourthof the factors concerned in the construction of dreams.
vi
Here is a further instance of a process of judgement at work in a dream
that I have already recorded. In the absurd dream of the communicationfrom the town council [pp. 447 ff.] I asked: ‘Did you get married soon after
that?’ I calculated that, of course, I was born in 1856, which seemed to be the
year which immediately followed the year in question. All of this was clothed
in the form of a set of logical conclusions. My father had married in 1851,immediately after his attack; I, of course, was the eldest of the family andhad been born in 1856; Q.E.D. As we know, this false conclusion wasdrawn in the interests of wish-fulﬁlment; and the predominant dream-thought ran: ‘Four or ﬁve years, that’s no time at all; it doesn’t count.’ Every
step in this set of logical conclusions, however alike in their content andtheir form, could be explained in another way as having been determinedby the dream-thoughts. It was the patient, of whose long analysis my col-
league had fallen foul, who had decided to get married immediately thetreatment was ﬁnished. The manner of my interview with my father in thedream was like an interrogation or examination, and reminded me too of ateacher at the University who used to take down exhaustive par ticulars fromthe students who were enrolling themselves for his lectures: ‘Date ofbirth?’—‘1856.’—‘Patre?’ In re ply to this one gave one’s father’s ﬁrst name
with a Latin termination; and we students assumed that the Hofrat drew
conclusions from the ﬁrst name of the father which could not always be
drawn from that of the student himself. Thus the drawing of the conclusion457 G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 457in the dream was no more than a repetition of the drawing of a conclusion
which appeared as a piece of the material of the dream-thoughts. Something
new emerges from this. If a conclusion appears in the content of the dreamthere is no question that it is derived from the dream-thoughts; but it mayeither be present in these as a piece of recollected material or it may link aseries of dream-thoughts together in a logical chain. In any case, however, aconclusion in a dream represents a conclusion in the dream-thoughts.
1
At this point we may resume our analysis of the dream. The interro-
gation by the professor led to a recollection of the register of UniversityStudents (which in my time was drawn up in Latin). It led further tothoughts upon the course of my academic studies. The ﬁve years which
are prescribed for medical studies were once again too few for me. I quietlywent on with my work for several more years; and in my circle of acquain-tances I was regarded as an idler and it was doubted whether I should everget through. Thereupon I quickly decided to take my examinations and I
got through them in spite of the delay. Here was a fresh re inforcement of
the dream-thoughts with which I was deﬁantly confronting my critics:‘Even though you won’t believe it because I’ve taken my time, I shall get
through; I shall bring my medical training to a conclusion. Things have of-
ten turned out like that before.’
This same dream in its opening passage contained some sentences which
could hardly be refused the name of an argument. This argument was noteven absurd; it might just as well have occurred in waking thought: Iw a s
amused in the dream at the communication from the town council since, in theﬁrst place, I was not yet in the world in 1851 and, in the second place, my fa-
ther, to whom it might have related, was already dead. Both of these state-
ments were not only correct in themselves but agreed precisely with the realarguments that I should bring up if I were actually to receive a communica-tion of that kind. My earlier analysis of the dream showed that it grew outof deeply embittered and derisive dream-thoughts. If we may also assumethat there were strong reasons present for the activity of the censorship, weshall understand that the dream-work had every motive for producing, a
perfectly valid refutation of an absurd suggestion on the model contained in
the dream-thoughts. The analysis showed, however, that the dream-work458 VI. The Dream-Work
1These ﬁndings are in some respects a correction of what I have said above (p. 328
f.) on the representation of logical relations in dreams. This earlier passage de-
scribes the general behaviour of the dream-work but takes no account of the ﬁnerand more precise details of its functioning.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 458did not have a free hand in framing this parallel but was obliged, for that
purpose, to use material from the dream-thoughts. It was just as thoughthere were an algebraic equation containing (in addition to numerals) plusand minus signs, indices and radical signs, and as though someone were tocopy out the equation without understanding it, taking over both the oper-ational symbols and the numerals into his copy but mixing them all up to-gether. The two arguments [in the dream-content] could be traced backto the following material. It was distressing to me to think that some of thepremises which underlay my psychological explana tions of the psycho -neuroses were bound to excite scepti cism and laughter when they were ﬁrstmet with. For instance, I had been driven to assume that impressions fromthe second year of life, and sometimes even from the ﬁrst, left a lasting traceon the emotional life of those who were later to fall ill, and that these impressions—though dis torted and exaggerated in many ways by the memory—might constitute the ﬁrst and deepest foundation for hystericalsymptoms. Patients, to whom I explained this at some appropriate moment,used to parody this newly-gained knowledge by declaring that they wereready to look for recollections dating from a time at which they were not yetalive. My discovery of the unexpected part played by their father in the ear-
liest sexual impulses of female patients might well be expected to meet witha similar reception (see the discussion on pp. 276). Nevertheless, it was mywell-grounded conviction that both of these hypotheses were true. By wayof conﬁrmation I called to mind some instances in which the death of thefather occurred while the child was at a very early age and in which laterevents, otherwise inexplicable, proved that the child had nevertheless re-tained unconsciously recollections of the ﬁgure which had disappeared soearly in his life. I was aware that these two assertions of mine rested on the
drawing of conclusions whose validity would be disputed. It was therefore an
achievement of wish-fulﬁlment when the material of precisely those conclu-sions which I was afraid would be contested was employed by the dream-work
for drawing conclusions which it was impossible to contest.
vii
At the beginning of a dream, which I have so far hardly touched upon
[see p. 422], there was a clear expression of astonishment at the subjectwhich had cropped up. Old Brücke must have set me some task; strangely
enough, it related to a dissection of the lower part of my own body, my pelvis459 G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 459and legs, which I saw before me as though in the dissecting-room, but without
noticing their absence in myself and also without a trace of any gruesome feel-ing. Louise N. was standing beside me and doing the work with me. Thepelvis had been eviscerated, and it was visible now in its superior, now in itsinferior, aspect, the two being mixed together. Thick ﬂesh-coloured protuber-ances (which, in the dream itself, made me think of haemorrhoids )could be
seen. Something which lay over it and was like crumpled silver-paper
1had
also to be carefully ﬁshed out. I was then once more in possession of my legsand was making my way through the town. But (being tired )I took a cab.
To my astonishment the cab drove in through the door of a house, whichopened and allowed it to pass along a passage which turned a corner at its endand ﬁnally led into the open air again.
2Finally I was making a journey
through a changing landscape with an Alpine guide who was carrying my be-longings. Part of the way he carried me too, out of consideration for my tiredlegs. The ground was boggy; we went round the edge; people were sitting on theground like Red Indians or gipsies —among them a girl. Before this I had been
making my own way forward over the slippery ground with a constant feelingof surprise that I was able to do it so well after the dissection. At last we reacheda small wooden house at the end of which was an open window. There theguide set me down and laid two wooden boards, which were standing ready,upon the window-sill, so as to bridge the chasm which had to be crossed overfrom the window. At that point I really became frightened about my legs, butinstead of the expected crossing, I saw two grown-up men lying on woodenbenches that were along the walls of the hut, and what seemed to be two chil-dren sleeping beside them. It was as though what was going to make the cross-ing possible was not the boards but the children. I awoke in a mental fright.
Anyone who has formed even the slightest idea of the extent of conden-
sation in dreams will easily imagine what a number of pages would be ﬁlledby a full analysis of this dream. Fortunately, however, in the present contextI need only take up one point in it, which provides an example of astonish-ment in dreams, as exhibited in the interpolation ‘strangely enough.’ The fol-
lowing was the occasion of the dream. Louise N., the lady who was assistingme in my job in the dream, had been calling on me. ‘Lend me somethingto read,’ she had said. I offered her Rider Haggard’s She. ‘A strange book,460 VI. The Dream-Work
1 Stanniol, which was an allusion to the book by Stannius on the nervous system
of ﬁshes. (Cf. loc. cit.)
2 It was the place on the ground-ﬂoor of my block of ﬂats where the tenants keep
their perambulators; but it was overdetermined in several other ways.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 460but full of bidden meaning,’ I began to explain to her; ‘the eternal femi-
nine, the immortality of our emotions . . .’ Here she interrupted me: ‘Iknow it already. Have you nothing of your own?’—‘No, my own immortalworks have not yet been written.’—‘Well, when are we to expect these so-called ultimate explanations of yours which you’ve promised even we shall
ﬁnd readable?’ she asked, with a touch of sarcasm. At that point I saw thatsomeone else was admonishing me through her mouth and I was silent. Ireﬂected on the amount of self-discipline it was costing me to offer the pub-lic even my book upon dreams—I should have to give away so much of myown private character in it.
Das Beste was du wissen kannst,Darfst du den Buben doch nicht sagen.
1
The task which was imposed on me in the dream of carrying out a dis-section of my own body was thus my self-analysis
2which was linked up
with my giving an account of my dreams. Old Brücke came in here ap-propriately; even in the ﬁrst years of my scientiﬁc work it happened thatI allowed a discovery of mine to lie fallow until an energetic remonstranceon his part drove me into publishing it. The further thoughts which werestarted up by my conversation with Louise N. went too deep to becomeconscious. They were diverted in the direction of the material that hadbeen stirred up in me by the mention of Rider Haggard’s She. The judge-
ment ‘strangely enough’ went back to that book and to another one, Heart
of the World, by the same author; and numerous elements of the dream
were derived from these two imaginative novels. The boggy ground overwhich people had to be carried, and the chasm which they had to crossby means of boards brought along with them, were taken from She; the
Red Indians, the girl and the wooden house were taken from Heart of the
World. In both novels the guide is a woman; both are concerned with per-
ilous journeys; while She describes an adventurous road that had scarcely
ever been trodden before, leading into an undiscovered region. The tiredfeeling in my legs, according to a note which I ﬁnd I made upon thedream, had been a real sensation during the daytime. It probably went461 G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams
1 [See footnote, p. 166.]
2 [Freud’s self-analysis during the years before the publication of this book is one
of the themes of his correspondence with Fliess (Freud, 1950 a). Cf. Part III of
Kris’s introduction to the latter volume.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 461along with a tired mood and a doubting thought: ‘How much longer will
my legs carry me?’ The end of the adventure in She is that the guide, in-
stead of ﬁnding immortality for herself and the others, perishes in themysterious subterranean ﬁre. A fear of that kind was unmistakably activein the dream-thoughts. The Vooden house’ was also, no doubt, a cofﬁn,that is to say, the grave. But the dream-work achieved a masterpiece inits representation of this most unwished-for of all thoughts by a wish- fulﬁlment. For I had already been in a grave once, but it was an excavated
Etruscan grave near Orvieto, a narrow chamber with two stone benchesalong its walls, on which the skeletons of two grown-up men were lying.The inside of the wooden house in the dream looked exactly like it, ex-cept that the stone was replaced by wood. The dream seems to have beensaying: ‘If you must rest in a grave, let it be the Etruscan one.’ And, bymaking this replacement, it transformed the gloomiest of expectationsinto one that was highly desirable.
1Unluckily, as we are soon to hear [pp.
466 ff.], a dream can turn into its opposite the idea accompanying an
 affect but not always the affect itself. Accordingly, I woke up in a ‘mental
fright,’ even after the successful emergence of the idea that children may
perhaps achieve what their father has failed to—a fresh allusion to thestrange novel in which a person’s identity is retained through a series ofgenerations for over two thousand years.
2
viii
Included in yet another of my dreams there was an expression of sur-
prise at something I had experienced in it; but the surprise was accompa-nied by such a striking, farfetched and almost brilliant attempt at anexplanation that, if only on its account, I cannot resist submitting the
whole dream to analysis, quite apart from the dream’s possessing two otherpoints to attract our interest. I was travelling along the Südbahn railway-
line during the night of July 18–19th, and in my sleep I heard: ‘Holl -
thurn,
3ten minutes’ being called out. I at once thought of holo- thurians
[sea-slugs]—of a natural history museum —that this was the spot at which462 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This detail is used as an illustration in Chapter III of Freud’s Future of an Illu-
sion (1927c ).]
2 [This dream is further discussed below on pp. 483 f.]
3 [Not the name of any real place.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 462valiant men had fought in vain against the superior power of the ruler of their
country—yes:, the Counter-Reformation in Austria —it was as though it were
a place in Styria or the Tyrol. I then saw indistinctly a small museum, in whichthe relics or belongings of these men were preserved. I should have liked to getout, but hesitated to do so. There were women with fruit on the platform. Theywere crouching on the ground and holding up their baskets invitingly.— I hes-
itated because I was not sure whether there was time, but we were still notmoving.— I was suddenly in another compartment, in which the upholstery
and seats were so narrow that one’s back pressed directly against the back of thecarriage.
1I was surprised by this, but I reﬂected that I might have changed
car riages while I was in a sleeping state. There were several people, in-
cluding an English brother and sister; a row of books were distinctly visible ona shelf on the wall. I saw ‘The Wealth of Nations’ and ‘Matter and Motion’(by Clerk-Maxwell ), a thick volume and bound in brown cloth. The manasked his sister about a book by Schiller, whether she had forgotten it. It seemedas though the books were sometimes mine and sometimes theirs. I felt inclinedat that point to intervene in the conversation in a conﬁrmatory or substantiat-ing sense. . . . I woke up perspiring all over, because all the windows were
shut. The train was drawn up at Marburg [in Styria].
While I was writing the dream down a new piece of it occurred to me,
which my memory had tried to pass over. I said [in English] to the brother
and sister, referring to a particular work: ‘It is from . . . ,’ but corrected myself:‘It is by . . .’ ‘Yes, ’ the man commented to his sister, ‘he said that right.’
2
The dream opened with the name of the station, which must no
doubt have partly woken me up. I replaced its name, Marburg, by Holl -
thurn. The fact that I heard ‘Mar burg’ when it was ﬁrst called out, or per-
haps later, was proved by the mentioning in the dream of Schiller, whowas born at Marburg, though not at the one in Styria.
3I was making my463 G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams
1 This description was unintelligible even to myself; but I have fol lowed the fun-
damental rule of reporting a dream in the words which occurred to me as I was
writing it down. The wording chosen is itself part of what is represented by thedream. [Cf. p. 516.]
2 [This piece of the dream is further considered on pp. 522 f.]
3 [Footnote added 1909:] Schiller was not born at any Marburg, but at Marbach,
as every German school-boy knows, and as I knew my self. This was one moreof those mistakes (see above, p. 219 n.) which slip in as a substitute for an in-tentional falsiﬁcation at some other point, and which I have tried to explain inmy Psycho-pathology of Everyday Life , [1901b, Chapter X, No. 1.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 463journey on that occasion, although I was travelling ﬁrst class, under very
uncomfortable conditions. The train was packed full, and in my com-partment I had found a lady and gentleman who appeared to be veryaristo cratic and had not the civility, or did not think it worth the trouble,to make any disguise of their annoyance at my intrusion. My polite greet-ing met with no response. Although the man and his wife were sittingside by side (with their backs to the engine) the woman nevertheless madehaste, under my very eyes, to engage the window-seat facing her by put-ting an umbrella on it. The door was shut immediately, and pointed re-marks were exchanged between them on the subject of opening windows.They had probably seen at once that I was longing for some fresh air. Itwas a hot night and the atmosphere in the completely closed compart-ment soon became suffocating. My experiences of travelling have taughtme that conduct of this ruthless and overbearing kind is a characteristicof people who are travelling on a free or half-price ticket. When theticket-collector came and I showed him the ticket I had bought at suchexpense, there fell from the lady’s mouth, in haughty and almost menac-ing tones, the words: ‘My husband has a free pass.’ She was an imposingﬁgure with discontented features, of an age not far from the time of thedecay of feminine beauty; the man uttered not a word but sat there mo-tionless. I attempted to sleep. In my dream I took fearful vengeance onmy disagreeable companions; no one could suspect what insults and hu-miliations lay concealed behind the broken fragments of the ﬁrst half ofthe dream. When this need had been satisﬁed a second wish made itselffelt—to change compartments. The scene is changed so often in dreams,and without the slightest objection being raised, that it would not havebeen in the least surprising if I had promptly replaced my travelling com-panions by more agreeable ones derived from my memory. But here wasa case in which something resented the change of scene and thought itnecessary to explain it. How did I suddenly come to be in another com-partment? I had no recollection of having changed. There could be onlyone explanation: I must have left the carriage while I was in a sleepingstate—a rare event, of which, however, examples are to be found in theexperience of a neuropathologist. We know of people who have goneupon railway journeys in a twilight state, without betraying their abnor-mal condition by any signs, till at some point in the journey they havesuddenly come to themselves completely and been amazed at the gap intheir memory. In the dream itself, accordingly, I was declaring myself tobe one of these cases of ‘automatisme ambulatoire.’464 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 464Analysis made it possible to ﬁnd another solution. The attempt at an ex-
planation, which seemed so striking when I was obliged to ascribe it to the
dream-work, was not an original one of my own, but was copied from theneurosis of one of my patients. I have already spoken elsewhere [pp. 277 f.]of a highly educated and, in real life, softhearted man who, shortly after thedeath of his parents, began to reproach himself with having murderous in-clinations, and then fell a victim to the precautionary measures which hewas obliged to adopt as a safeguard. It was a case of severe obsessions accom-panied by complete insight. To begin with, walking through the streets wasmade a burden to him by a compulsion to make certain where every singleperson he met disappeared to; if anyone suddenly escaped his watchful eye,he was left with a distressing feeling and the idea that he might possibly havegot rid of him. What lay behind this was, among other things, a ‘Cain’phantasy—for ‘all men are brothers.’ Owing to the impossibility of carryingout this task, he gave up going for walks and spent his life incarcerated be-tween his own four walls. But reports of murders which had been commit-ted outside were constantly being brought into his room by the newspapers,and his conscience suggested to him, in the form of a doubt, that he mightbe the wanted murderer. The certainty that he had in fact not left his housefor weeks protected him from these charges for a while, till one day the pos-sibility came into his head that he might have left his house while he was in an
unconscious state and have thus been able to commit the murder without
knowing anything about it. From that time onwards he locked the frontdoor of the house and gave the key to his old housekeeper with strict in-structions never to let it fall into his hands even if he asked for it.
This, then, was the origin of my attempted explanation to the effect
that I had changed carriages while I was in an unconscious state; it hadbeen carried over ready-made into the dream from the material of thedream-thoughts, and was evidently intended in the dream to serve thepurpose of identifying me with the ﬁgure of this patient. My recollectionof him had been aroused by an easy association. My last night-journey, afew weeks earlier, had been made in the company of this very man. He wascured, and was travelling with me into the provinces to visit his relatives,who had sent for me. We had a compartment to ourselves; we left all thewindows open all through the night and had a most entertaining time foras long as I stayed awake. I knew that the root of his illness had been hos-tile impulses against his father, dating from his childhood and involving asexual situation. In so far, therefore, as I was identifying myself with him,I was seeking to confess to something analogous. And in fact the second465 G. Intellectual Activity in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 465scene of the dream ended in a somewhat extravagant phantasy that my
two elderly travelling companions had treated me in such a stand-ofﬁshway because my arrival had prevented the affectionate exchanges whichthey had planned for the night. This phantasy went back, however, to ascene of early childhood in which the child, probably driven by sexual curiosity, had forced his way into his parents’ bedroom and been turnedout of it by his father’s orders.
It is unnecessary, I think, to accumulate further ex amples. They would
merely serve to conﬁrm what we have gathered from those I have alreadyquoted—that an act of judgement in a dream is only a repetition of someprototype in the dream-thoughts. As a rule, the repetition is ill-appliedand interpolated into an inappropriate context, but occasionally, as in ourlast instances, it is so neatly employed that to begin with it may give theimpression of independent intellectual activity in the dream. From thispoint we might turn our attention to the psychical activity which, thoughit does not appear to accompany the construction of dreams invariably,yet, whenever it does so, is concerned to fuse together elements in a dreamwhich are of a disparate origin into a whole which shall make sense andbe without contradiction. Before approaching that subject, however, weare under an urgent necessity to consider the expressions of affect whichoccur in dreams and to compare them with the affects which analysis un-covers in the dream-thoughts.
(H)
AFFECTS IN DREAMS
A shrewd observation made by Strieker [1879, 51] has drawn our at-
tention to the fact that the expression of affect in dreams cannot be dealtwith in the same con temptuous fashion in which, after waking, we are ac -customed to dismiss their content. ‘If I am afraid of rob bers in a dream, the
robbers, it is true, are imaginary—but the fear is real.’ [Cf. p. 101.] Andthis is equally true if I feel glad in a dream. Our feeling tells us that an af-
fect experienced in a dream is in no way inferior to one of equal intensityexperienced in waking life; and dreams insist with greater energy upontheir right to be included among our real mental experiences in respect to466 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 466their affective than in respect to their ideational content. In our waking
state, however, we cannot in fact include them in this way, because we can-not make any psychical assessment of an affect unless it is linked to a pieceof ideational material. If the affect and the idea are incompatible in theircharacter and intensity, our waking judgement is at a loss.
It has always been a matter for surprise that in dreams the ideational
content is not accompanied by the affective consequences that we shouldregard as inevitable in waking thought. Strümpel [1877, 27 f.] declaredthat in dreams ideas are denuded of their psychical values [cf. pp. 82 f.].But there is no lack in dreams of instances of a contrary kind, where anintense expression of affect appears in connection with subject-matterwhich seems to provide no occasion for any such expression. In a dreamI may be in a horrible, dangerous and disgusting situation without feelingany fear or repulsion; while another time, on the contrary, I may be terri-ﬁed at something harmless and delighted at something childish.
This particular enigma of dream-life vanishes more suddenly, perhaps,
and more completely than any other, as soon as we pass over from the man-ifest to the latent content of the dream. We need not bother about theenigma, since it no longer exists. Analysis shows us that the ideational mate-
rial has undergone displacements and substitutions, whereas the affects have re-mained unaltered. It is small wonder that the ideational material, which has
been changed by dream-distortion, should no longer be compatible with theaffect, which is retained unmodiﬁed; nor is there anything left to be surprisedat after analysis has put the right material back into its former position.
1467 H. Affects in Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1919:] If I am not greatly mistaken, the ﬁrst dream that I was
able to pick up from my grandson, at the age of one year and eight months, re-
vealed a state of affairs in which the dream-work had succeeded in transformingthe material of the dream-thoughts into a wish-fulﬁlment, whereas the affect be-
longing to them persisted unchanged during the state of sleep. On the night be-fore the day on which his father was due to leave for the front, the child criedout, sobbing violently: ‘Daddy! Daddy!—baby!’ This can only have meant thatDaddy and baby were remaining together; whereas the tears recognized the ap-proaching farewell. At that time the child was already quite well able to expressthe concept of separation. ‘Fort’ [‘gone’] (replaced by a long-drawn-out and pe-
culiarly stressed ‘o—o—o’) had been one of his ﬁrst words, and several monthsbefore this ﬁrst dream he had played at ‘gone’ with all his toys. This game wentback to a successful piece of self-discipline which he had achieved at an early agein allowing his mother to leave him and be ‘gone.’ [Cf. Chapter II of Beyond the
Pleasure Principle (Freud, 1920g).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 467In the case of a psychical complex which has come under the inﬂuence
of the censorship imposed by resistance, the affects are the constituent
which is least inﬂuenced and which alone can give us a pointer as to how
we should ﬁll in the missing thoughts. This is seen even more clearly inthe psychoneuroses than in dreams. Their affects are always appropriate,at least in their quality, though we must allow for their intensity being in-
creased owing to displacements of neurotic attention. If a hysteric is sur-prised at having to be so frightened of something trivial or if a mansuffering from obsessions is surprised at such distressing self-reproachesarising out of a mere nothing, they have both gone astray, because theyregard the ideational content—the triviality or the mere nothing—aswhat is essential; and they put up an unsuccessful ﬁght because they takethis ideational content as the starting-point of their thought-activity. Psycho-analysis can put them upon the right path by recognizing the af-fect as being, on the contrary, justiﬁed and by seeking out the idea whichbelongs to it but has been repressed and replaced by a substitute. A nec-essary premise to all this is that the release of affect and the ideationalcontent do not constitute the indissoluble organic unity as which we arein the habit of treating them, but that these two separate entities may bemerely soldered together and can thus be detached from each other by
analysis. Dream-interpretation shows that this is in fact the case.
I shall begin by giving an example in which analysis ex plained the ap-
parent absence of affect in a case where the ideational content shouldhave necessitated its release.
i
She saw three lions in a desert, one of which was laughing; but she was not
afraid of them. Afterwards, however, she must have run away from them, forshe was trying to climb up a tree; but she found that her cousin, who was aFrench mistress, was up there already, etc.
The analysis brought up the following material. The indifferent pre-
cipitating cause of the dream was a sentence in her English composition:‘The mane is the ornament of the lion.’ Her father wore a beard whichframed his face like a mane. Her English mistress was called Miss Lyons.An acquaintance had sent her the ballads of Loewe [the German word for‘lion’]. These, then, were the three lions; why should she be afraid of468 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 468them?—She had read a story in which a negro, who had stirred up his
companions to revolt, was hunted with blood-hounds and climbed upa tree to save himself. She went on, in the highest spirits, to produce anumber of fragmentary recollections, such as the advice on how to catchlions from Fliegende Blatter: ‘Take a desert and put it through a sieve andthe lions will be left over.’ And again, the highly amusing but not veryproper anecdote of an ofﬁcial who was asked why he did not take moretrouble to ingratiate himself with the head of his department and repliedthat he had tried to make his way in, but his superior was up there already.
The whole material became in telligible when it turned out that the ladyhad had a visit on the dream-day from her husband’s superior. He hadbeen very polite to her and had kissed her hand and she had not been in
the least afraid of him, although he was a very ‘big bug’ [in German,
‘grosses Tier’ = ‘big animal’], and played the part of a ‘social lion’ in the
capital of the country she came from. So this lion was like the lion in A
Midsummer Night’s Dream that concealed the ﬁgure of Snug the joiner;and the same is true of all dream-lions of which the dreamer is not afraid.
ii
As my second example I may quote the dream of the young girl who
saw her sister’s little son lying dead in his cofﬁn [pp. 176 ff. and 267], butwho, as I may now add, felt neither pain nor grief. We know from theanalysis why this was. The dream merely disguised her wish to see the manshe was in love with once more; and her affect had to be in tune with herwish and not with its disguise. There was thus no occasion for grief.
In some dreams the affect does at least remain in contact with the
ideational material which has replaced that to which the affect was origi-nally attached. In others, the dis solution of the complex has gone further.The affect makes its appearance completely detached from the idea whichbelongs to it and is introduced at some other point in the dream, where itﬁts in with the new arrangement of the dream-elements. The situation isthen similar to the one we have found in the case of acts of judgement indreams [pp. 452 ff.]. If an important conclusion is drawn in the dream-thoughts, the dream also contains one; but the conclusion in the dreammay be displaced on to quite different material. Such a displacement notinfrequently follows the principle of antithesis.469 H. Affects in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 469This last possibility is exempliﬁed in the following dream, which I
have submitted to a most exhaustive analysis.
iii
A castle by the sea; later it was no longer immediately on the sea, but on a nar-
row canal leading to the sea. The Governor was a Herr P . I was standing withhim in a big reception room —with three windows in front of which there rose
buttresses with what looked like crenellations. I had been attached to the gar-rison as something in the nature of a volunteer naval ofﬁcer. We feared the ar-rival of enemy warships, since we were in a state of war. Herr P . intended toleave, and gave me instructions as to what was to be done if the event that wefeared took place. His invalid wife was with their children in the threatenedcastle. If the bombardment began, the great hall was to be evacuated. Hebreathed heavily and turned to go; I held him back and asked him how I wasto communicate with him in case of necessity. He added something in reply, butimmediately fell down dead. No doubt I had put an unnecessary strain uponhim with my questions. After his death, which made no further impression onme, I won dered whether his widow would remain in the castle, whether Ishould report his death to the Higher Command and whether I should takeover command of the castle as being next in order of rank. I was standing atthe window, and observing the ships as they went past. They were merchantvessels rushing past rapidly through the dark water, some of them with severalfunnels and others with bulging decks (just like the station buildings in the
introductory dream—not reported here). Then my brother was standing be-
side me and we were both looking out of the window at the canal. At the sightof one ship we were frightened and cried out: ‘Here comes the warship!’ But itturned out that it was only the same ships that I already knew returning. Therenow came a small ship, cut off short, in a comic fashion, in the middle. On itsdeck some curious cup-shaped or box-shaped objects were visible. We called outwith one voice: ‘That’s the breakfast-ship!’
The rapid movements of the ships, the deep dark blue of the water
and the brown smoke from the funnels—all of this combined to create atense and sinister impression.
The localities in the dream were brought together from several trips of
mine to the Adriatic (to Miramare, Duino, Venice and Aquileia). A shortbut enjoyable Easter trip which I had made to Aquileia with my brother a470 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 470few weeks before the dream was still fresh in my memory.1The dream also
contained allusions to the maritime war between America and Spain and to
anxieties to which it had given rise about the fate of my relatives in Amer-
ica. At two points in the dream affects were in question. At one point anaffect that was to be anticipated was absent: attention was expressly drawnto the fact that the Governor’s death made no impression on me. At an-other point, when I thought I saw the warship, I was frightened and felt all
the sensations of fright in my sleep. In this well- constructed dream the af-fects were distributed in such a way that any striking contradiction wasavoided. There was no reason why I should be frightened at the death ofthe Governor and it was quite reasonable that as Commandant of the Cas-tle I should be frightened at the sight of the warship. The analysis showed,however, that Herr P . was only a substitute for my own self. (In the dreamIwas the substitute for him.) I was the Governor who suddenly died. The
dream-thoughts dealt with the future of my family after my prematuredeath. This was the only distressing one among the dream-thoughts; andit must have been from it that the fright was detached and brought intoconnection in the dream with the sight of the warship. On the other hand,the analysis showed that the region of the dream-thoughts from which thewarship was taken was ﬁlled with the most cheerful recollections. It was ayear earlier, in Venice, and we were standing one magically beautiful day atthe windows of our room on the Riva degli Schiavoni and were lookingacross the blue lagoon on which that day there was more movement thanusual. English ships were expected and were to be given a ceremonial re-ception. Suddenly my wife cried out gaily as a child: ‘Here comes the English
warship!’ In the dream I was frightened at these same words. (We see once
again that speeches in a dream are derived from speeches in real life [cf. pp.427 ft.]; I shall show shortly that the element ‘English’ in my wife’s excla-
mation did not elude the dream-work either.) Here, then, in the process ofchanging the dream-thoughts into the manifest dream-content, I havetransformed cheerfulness into fear, and I need only hint that this trans -
formation was itself giving expression to a portion of the latent dream- content. This example proves, however, that the dream-work is at liberty to471 H. Affects in Dreams
1 [This trip was described at length by Freud in a letter to Fliess of April 14, 1898
(Freud, 1950 a, Letter 88). Aquileia, a few miles inland, is connected by a small
canal with the lagoon, on one of whose islands Grado is situated. These places,
at the northern end of the Adriatic, formed part of Austria before 1918.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 471detach an affect from its connections in the dream-thoughts and introduce
it at any other point it chooses in the manifest dream.
I take this opportunity of making a somewhat detailed analysis of the
‘breakfast-ship,’ the appearance of which in the dream brought such anonsensical conclusion to a situation which had up to then been kept ata rational level. When subsequently I called the dream-object more pre-cisely to mind, it struck me that it was black and that, owing to the factthat it was cut off short where it was broadest in the middle, it bore agreat resemblance at that end to a class of objects which had attracted ourinterest in the museums in the Etruscan towns. These were rectangulartrays of black pottery, with two handles, on which there stood things likecoffee- or tea-cups, not altogether unlike one of our modern breakfast-sets.
In response to our enquiries we learned that this was the ‘toilette’ [toilet-
set] of an Etruscan lady, with receptacles for cosmetics and powder on it,and we had jokingly remarked that it would be a good idea to take onehome with us for the lady of the house. The object in the dream meant,accordingly, a black ‘toilette,’ i.e. mourning dress, and made a direct ref-erence to a death. The other end of the dream-object reminded me of thefuneral boats
1in which in early times dead bodies were placed and com-
mitted to the sea for burial. This led on to the point which explained whythe ships returned in the dream:
Still, auf gerettetem Boot, treibt in den Hafen der Greis.
2
It was the return after a shipwreck [ ‘Schiffbruch,’ literally ‘ship-break’]—the
breakfast-ship was broken off short in the middle. But what was the originof the name ‘breakfast’-ship? It was here that the word ‘English’ came in,which was left over from the warships. The English word ‘breakfast’ means‘breaking fast.’ The ‘breaking’ related once more to the shipwreck [‘ship-break’] and the fasting was connected with the black dress or toilette.
But it was only the name of the breakfast-ship that was newly con-
structed by the dream. The thing had existed and reminded me of one of472 VI. The Dream-Work
1 ‘Nachen’ [in German], a word which is derived, as a philological friend tells me,
from the root ‘ ν′εχυς ’ [corpse].
2 [Safe on his ship, the old man quietly sails into port.
(Part of an allegory of life and death.)
Schiller, Nachträge zu den Xenien,
‘Erwartung und Erfüllung.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 472the most enjoyable parts of my last trip. Mistrusting the food that would
be provided at Aquileia, we had brought provisions with us from Goriziaand had bought a bottle of excellent Istrian wine at Aquileia. And whilethe little mail steamer made its way slowly through the ‘Canale delle Mee’
across the empty lagoon to Grado we, who were the only passengers, ateour breakfast on deck in the highest spirits, and we had rarely tasted abetter one. This, then, was the ‘breakfast-ship,’ and it was precisely be-hind this memory of the most cheerful joie de vivre that the dream con-
cealed the gloomiest thoughts of an unknown and uncanny future.
1
The detachment of affects from the ideational material which generated
them is the most striking thing which occurs to them during the formationof dreams; but it is neither the only nor the most essential alteration under-gone by them on their path from the dream-thoughts to the manifest dream.If we compare the affects of the dream-thoughts with those in the dream, onething at once becomes clear. Whenever there is an affect in the dream, it isalso to be found in the dream-thoughts. But the reverse is not true. A dreamis in general poorer in affect than the psychical material from the manipu -lation of which it has proceeded. When I have reconstructed the dream-thoughts, I habitually ﬁnd the most intense psychical impulses in themstriving to make themselves felt and struggling as a rule against others that aresharply opposed to them. If I then turn back to the dream, it not infrequentlyappears colourless, and without emotional tone of any great intensity. Thedream-work has reduced to a level of indifference not only the content butoften the emotional tone of my thoughts as well. It might be said that thedream-work brings about a suppression of affects. Let us, for instance, take the
dream of the botanical monograph [pp. 193 ff.]. The thoughts correspondingto it consisted of a passionately agitated plea on behalf of my liberty to act asI chose to act and to govern my life as seemed right to me and me alone. Thedream that arose from them has an indifferent ring about it: ‘I had written amonograph; it lay before me; it contained coloured plates; dried plants ac-companied each copy.’ This reminds one of the peace that has descendedupon a battleﬁeld strewn with corpses; no trace is left of the struggle whichraged over it.
Things can be otherwise: lively manifestations of affect can make their
way into the dream itself. For the moment, however, I will dwell upon the473 H. Affects in Dreams
1 [This dream is mentioned again on p. 548.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 473incontestable fact that large numbers of dreams appear to be indifferent,
whereas it is never possible to enter into the dream-thoughts without be-ing deeply moved.
No complete theoretical explanation can here be given of this suppres-
sion of affect in the course of the dream-work. It would require to be pre-ceded by a most painstaking investigation of the theory of affects and ofthe mechanism of repression. [Cf. pp. 600 ff.] I will only permit myself areference to two points. I am compelled—for other reasons—to picturethe release of affects as a centrifugal process directed towards the interiorof the body and analogous to the processes of motor and secretory inner-vation.
1Now just as in the state of sleep the sending out of motor impulses
towards the external world appears to be suspended, so it may be that thecentrifugal calling-up of affects by unconscious thinking may becomemore difﬁcult during sleep. In that case the affective impulses occurringduring the course of the dream-thoughts would from their very nature beweak impulses, and conse quently those which found their way into thedream would be no less weak. On this view, then, the ‘suppression of af-fect’ would not in any way be the consequence of the dream-work butwould result from the state of sleep. This may be true, but it cannot be thewhole truth. We must also bear in mind that any relatively complex dreamturns out to be a compromise produced by a conﬂict between psychicalforces. For one thing, the thoughts constructing the wish are obliged tostruggle against the opposition of a censoring agency; and for anotherthing, we have often seen that in unconscious thinking itself every train ofthought is yoked with its contradictory opposite. Since all of these trainsof thought are capable of carrying an affect, we shall by and large scarcelybe wrong if we regard the suppression of affect as a consequence of the in-hibition which these contraries exercise upon each other and which thecensorship exercises upon the impulsions suppressed by it. The inhibition
of affect, accordingly, must be considered as the second consequence of the cen-sorship of dreams, just as dream-distortion is its ﬁrst consequence.474 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [The release of affects is described as ‘centrifugal’ (though directed towards the
interior of the body) from the point of view of the mental apparatus. The theory
of the release of affects implicit in this passage is explained at some length in Sec-tion 12 (‘The Experience of Pain’) of Part I of Freud’s ‘Project for a ScientiﬁcPsychology’ (in Freud, 1950 a). See also p. 580 below.—For Freud’s use of the
term ‘innervation’ see footnote, p. 539.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 474I will here give as an instance a dream in which the indifferent feeling-
tone of the content of the dream can be explained by the antithesis be-
tween the dream-thoughts. It is a short dream, which will ﬁll every readerwith disgust.
iv
A hill, on which there was something like an open-air closet: a very long
seat with a large hole at the end of it. Its back edge was thickly covered withsmall heaps of faeces of all sizes and degrees of freshness. There were bushes be-hind the seat. I micturated on the seat; a long stream of urine washed every-thing clean; the lumps of faeces came away easily and fell into the opening. Itwas as though at the end there was still some left.
Why did I feel no disgust during this dream?Because, as the analysis showed, the most agreeable and satisfying
thoughts contributed to bringing the dream about. What at once occurredto me in the analysis were the Augean stables which were cleansed by Her-cules. This Hercules was I. The hill and bushes came from Aussee, wheremy children were stopping at the time. I had discovered the infantile aeti-ology of the neuroses and had thus saved my own children from falling ill.The seat (except, of course, for the hole) was an exact copy of a piece offurniture which had been given to me as a present by a grateful woman patient. It thus reminded me of how much my patients honoured me. In-deed, even the museum of human excrement could be given an interpre-tation to rejoice my heart. However much I might be disgusted by it inreality, in the dream it was a reminiscence of the fair land of Italy where,as we all know, the W.C.s in the small towns are furnished in precisely thisway. The stream of urine which washed everything clean was an unmis-takable sign of greatness. It was in that way that Gul liver extinguished thegreat ﬁre in Lilliput—though incidentally this brought him into disfavourwith its tiny queen. But Gargantua, too, Rabelais’ superman, revengedhimself in the same way on the Parisians by sitting astride on Notre Dameand turning his stream of urine upon the city. It was only on the previousevening before going to sleep that I had been turning over Garnier’s illus-trations to Rabelais. And, strangely enough, here was another piece of ev-idence that I was the superman. The platform of Notre Dame was myfavourite resort in Paris; every free afternoon I used to clamber about there475 H. Affects in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 475on the towers of the church between the monsters and the devils. The fact
that all the faeces disappeared so quickly under the stream recalled themotto: ‘Afﬂavit et dissipati sunt,’ which I intended one day to put at the
head of a chapter upon the therapy of hysteria.
1
And now for the true exciting cause of the dream. It had been a hot
summer afternoon; and during the evening I had delivered my lecture onthe connection between hysteria and the perversions, and everything Ihad had to say displeased me intensely and seemed to me completely de-void of any value. I was tired and felt no trace of enjoyment in my difﬁ-cult work; I longed to be away from all this grubbing about in humandirt and to be able to join my children and afterwards visit the beautiesof Italy. In this mood I went from the lecture room to a café, where I hada modest snack in the open air, since I had no appetite for food. One ofmy audience, however, went with me and he begged leave to sit by mewhile I drank my coffee and choked over my cresent roll. He began toﬂatter me: telling me how much he had learnt from me, how he lookedat, everything now with fresh eyes, how I had cleansed the Augean stables
of errors and prejudices in my theory of the neuroses. He told me, inshort, that I was a very great man. My mood ﬁtted ill with this paean ofpraise; I fought against my feeling of disgust, went home early to escapefrom him, and before going to sleep turned over the pages of Rabelais andread one of Conrad Ferdinand Meyer’s short stories, ‘Die Leiden eines
 Knaben’ [‘A Boy’s Sorrows’].
Such was the material out of which the dream emerged. Meyer’s short
story brought up in addition a recollection of scenes from my childhood.(Cf. the last episode in the dream about Count Thun [pp. 235 f.].) Thedaytime mood of revulsion and disgust persisted into the dream in so faras it was able to provide almost the entire material of its manifest content.But during the night a contrary mood of powerful and even exaggeratedself-assertiveness arose and displaced the former one. The content of thedream had to ﬁnd a form which would enable it to express both the delu-sions of inferiority and the megalomania in the same material. The com-promise between them produced an ambiguous dream-content; but italso resulted in an indifferent feeling-tone owing to the mutual inhibitionof these contrary impulses.476 VI. The Dream-Work
1[Footnote in 1925 edition only:] For a correction of this quotation see above,
p. 235 n. 2.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 476According to the theory of wish-fulﬁlment, this dream would not have
become possible if the antithetical megalomanie train of thought (which,
it is true, was suppressed, but had a pleasurable tone) had not emerged inaddition to the feeling of disgust. For what is distressing may not be rep-resented in a dream; nothing in our dream-thoughts which is distressingcan force an entry into a dream unless it at the same time lends a disguiseto the fulﬁlment of a wish. [Cf. pp. 557 f.]
There is yet another alternative way in which the dream-work can deal
with affects in the dream-thoughts, in addition to allowing them throughor reducing them to nothing. It can turn them into their opposite. We have
already become acquainted with the interpretative rule according to whichevery element in a dream can, for purposes of interpretation, stand for itsopposite just as easily as for itself. [See p. 334.] We can never tell before-hand whether it stands for the one or for the other; only the context candecide. A suspicion of this truth has evidently found its way into popularconsciousness: ‘dream-books’ very often adopt the principle of contrariesin their interpretation of dreams. This turning of a thing into its oppositeis made possible by the intimate associative chain which links the idea ofa thing with its opposite in our thoughts. Like any other kind of displace-ment it can serve the ends of the censorship; but it is also frequently aproduct of wish-fulﬁlment, for wish-fulﬁlment consists in nothing elsethan a replacement of a disagreeable thing by its opposite. Just as ideas ofthings can make their appearance in dreams turned into their opposite,so too can the affects attaching to dream-thoughts; and it seems likely that
this reversal of affect is brought about as a rule by the dream-censorship.In social life, which has provided us with our familiar analogy with thedream-censorship, we also make use of the suppression and reversal of affect, principally for purposes of dissimulation. If I am talking to some-one whom I am obliged to treat with consideration while wishing to saysomething hostile to him, it is almost more important that I should con-ceal any expression of my affect from him than that I should mitigate the
verbal form of my thoughts. If I were to address him in words that werenot impolite, but accompanied them with a look or gesture of hatred andcontempt, the effect which I should produce on him would not be verydifferent from what it would have been if I had thrown my contemptopenly in his face. Accordingly, the censorship bids me above all suppressmy affects; and, if I am a master of dissimulation, I shall assume the477 H. Affects in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 477 opposite affect—smile when I am angry and seem affectionate when I wish
to destroy.
We have already come across an excellent example of a reversal of affect
of this kind carried out in a dream on behalf of the dream-censorship. In
the dream of ‘my uncle with the yellow beard’ [pp. 163 ff.] I felt the great-est affection for my friend R., whereas and because the dream-thoughtscalled him a simpleton. It was from this example of reversal of affect thatwe derived our ﬁrst hint of the existence of a dream- censorship. Nor is itnecessary to assume, in such cases either, that the dream-work creates con-
trary affects of this kind out of nothing; it ﬁnds them as a rule lying readyto hand in the material of the dream-thoughts, and merely intensiﬁesthem with the psychical force arising from a motive of defence, till theycan predominate for the purposes of dream-formation. In the dream of myuncle which I have just mentioned, the antithetical, affectionate affectprobably arose from an infantile source (as was suggested by the later partof the dream), for the uncle-nephew relationship, owing to the peculiarnature of the earliest experiences of my childhood (cf. the analysis on pp.433 f. [and below, pp. 488]) had become the source of all my friendshipsand all my hatreds.
An excellent example of a reversal of affect of this kind
1will be found
in a dream recorded by Ferenczi (1916): ‘An elderly gentleman was awak-ened one night by his wife, who had become alarmed because he waslaughing so loudly and unrestrainedly in his sleep. Subsequently the manreported that he had had the following dream: I was lying in bed and a
gentleman who was known to me entered the room; I tried to turn on thelight but was unable to: I tried over and over again, but in vain. Thereuponmy wife got out of bed to help me, but she could not manage it either. But asshe felt awkward in front of the gentleman owing to being ‘en négligé,’ she ﬁ-nally gave it up and went back to bed. All of this was so funny that I couldn’thelp roaring with laughter at it. My wife said, ‘Why are you laughing? whyare you laughing?’ but I only went on laughing till I woke up.—Next day thegentleman was very depressed and had a headache: so much laughing hadupset him, he thought.
‘The dream seems less amusing when it is considered analytically. The
“gentleman known to him” who entered the room was, in the latent dream-thoughts, the picture of Death as the “great Unknown”—a picture whichhad been called up in his mind during the previous day. The old gentleman,478 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1919.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 478who suffered from arterio-sclerosis, had had good reason the day before for
thinking of dying. The unrestrained laughter took the place of sobbing andweeping at the idea that he must die. It was the light of life that he could nolonger turn on. This gloomy thought may have been connected with at-tempts at copulation which he had made shortly before but which had failedeven with the help of his wife en négligé. He realized that he was already go-
ing down hill. The dream-work succeeded in transforming the gloomy ideaof impotence and death into a comic scene, and his sobs into laughter.’
There is one class of dreams which have a particular claim to be
 described as ‘hypocritical’ and which offer a hard test to the theory ofwish-fulﬁlment.
1My attention was drawn to them when Frau Dr. M.
Hil ferding brought up the following record of a dream of Peter Rosegger’sfor discussion by the Vienna Psycho-Analytical Society.
Rosegger writes in his story ‘Fremd gemacht!’
2‘As a rule I am a sound
sleeper but many a night I have lost my rest—for, along with my modestcareer as a student and man of letters, I have for many years dragged aroundwith me, like a ghost from which I could not set myself free, the shadow ofa tailor’s life.
‘It is not as though in the daytime I had reﬂected very often or very in-
tensely on my past. One who had cast off the skin of a Philistine and wasseeking to conquer Earth and Heaven had other things to do. Nor wouldI, when I was a dashing young fellow, have given more than a thought tomy nightly dreams. Only later, when the habit had come to me of reﬂect-ing upon everything, or when the Philistine within me began to stir a tri-ﬂe, did I ask myself why it should be that, if I dreamt at all, I was always ajourneyman tailor and that I spent so long a time as such with my masterand worked without pay in his workshop. I knew well enough, as I sat likethat beside him, sewing and ironing, that my right place was no longerthere and that as a townsman I had other things to occupy me. But I wasalways on vacation, I was always having holidays, and so it was that I satbeside my master as his assistant. It often irked me and I felt sad at the lossof time in which I might well have found better and more useful things todo. Now and then, when something went awry, I had to put up with a479 H. Affects in Dreams
1 [This paragraph and the following quotation from Rosegger, to gether with the
discussion of it, were added in 1911. Rosegger (1843–1918) was a well-known
Austrian writer who reached celebrity from very humble, peasant beginnings.]
2 [‘Dismissed!’] In the second volume of Waldheimat, p. 303.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 479scolding from my master, though there was never any talk of wages. Often,
as I sat there with bent back in the dark workshop, I thought of giving no-tice and taking my leave. Once I even did so; but my master paid no heedand I was soon sitting beside him again and sewing.
‘After such tedious hours, what a joy it was to wake! And I determined
that if this persistent dream should come again I would throw it from mewith energy and call aloud: “This is mere hocus-pocus, I am lying in bedand want to sleep. . . .” But next night I was once more sitting in the tai-lor’s workshop.
‘And so it went on for years with uncanny regularity. Now it happened
once that my master and I were work ing at Alphelhofer’s (the peasant inwhose house I had worked when I was ﬁrst apprenticed) and my mastershowed himself quite especially dissatisﬁed with my work. “I’d like toknow where you’re wool-gathering,” he said, and looked at me darkly. Themost reasonable thing to do, I thought, would be to stand up and tell himthat I was only with him to please him and then go off. But I did not doso. I made no objection when my master took on an apprentice and or-dered me to make room for him on the bench. I moved into the cornerand sewed. The same day another journeyman was taken on as well, acanting hypocrite—he was a Bohemian—who had worked at our placenineteen years before, and had fallen into the brook once on his way backfrom the inn. When he looked for a seat there was no more room. I turnedto my master questioningly, and he said to me: “You’ve no gift for tailor-ing, you can go! you’re dismissed!” My fright at this was so overpoweringthat I awoke.
‘The grey light of morning was glimmering through the uncurtained
windows into my familiar home. Works of art surrounded me; there in myhandsome bookcase stood the eternal Homer, the gigantic Dante, the in-comparable Shakespeare, the glorious Goethe—all the magniﬁcent immor-tals. From the next room rang out the clear young voices of the awakeningchildren joking with their mother. I felt as though I had found afresh thisidyllically sweet, this peaceful, poetic, spiritual life in which I had so oftenand so deeply felt a meditative human happiness. Yet it vexed me that I hadnot been beforehand with my master in giving him notice, but had beendismissed by him.
‘And how astonished I was! From the night on which my master dis-
missed me, I enjoyed peace; I dreamt no more of the tailoring days whichlay so far back in my past—days which had been so cheerfully unassum-ing but had thrown such a long shadow over my later years.’480 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 480In this series of dreams dreamt by an author who had been a journey-
man tailor in his youth, it is hard to recognize the dominance of wish-
 fulﬁlment. All the dreamer’s enjoyment lay in his daytime existence,whereas in his dreams he was still haunted by the shadow of an unhappylife from which he had at last escaped. Some dreams of my own of a simi-lar kind have enabled me to throw a little light on the subject. As a youngdoctor I worked for a long time at the Chemical Institute without ever be-coming proﬁcient in the skills which that science demands; and for thatreason in my waking life I have never liked thinking of this barren and in-deed humiliating episode in my apprenticeship. On the other hand I havea regularly recurring dream of working in the laboratory, of carrying outanalyses and of having various experiences there. These dreams are dis-agreeable in the same way as examinations dreams and they are never verydistinct. While I was interpreting one of them, my attention was eventu-ally attracted by the word ‘analysis, ’ which gave me a key to their under-
standing. Since those days I have become an ‘analyst,’ and I now carry outanalyses which are very highly spoken of, though it is true that they are‘psycho-analyses.’ It was now clear to me: if I have grown proud of carrying
out analyses of that kind in my daytime life and feel inclined to boast tomyself of how successful I have become, my dreams remind me during thenight of those other, unsuccessful analyses of which I have no reason to feelproud. They are the punishment dreams of a parvenu, like the dreams of
the journeyman tailor who had grown into a famous author. But how doesit become possible for a dream, in the conﬂict between a parvenu’s pride
and his self-criticism, to side with the latter, and choose as its content asensible warning instead of an unlawful wish-fulﬁlment? As I have alreadysaid, the answer to this question raises difﬁculties. We may conclude thatthe foundation of the dream was formed in the ﬁrst instance by an exag-geratedly ambitious phantasy, but that humiliating thoughts that pouredcold water on the phantasy found their way into the dream instead. It maybe remembered that there are masochistic impulses in the mind, whichmay be responsible for a reversal such as this. I should have no objectionto this class of dreams being distinguished from ‘wish-fulﬁlment dreams’under the name of ‘punishment dreams.’ I should not regard this as im-plying any qualiﬁcation of the theory of dreams which I have hitherto putforward; it would be no more than a linguistic expedient for meeting thedifﬁculties of those who ﬁnd it strange that opposites should converge.
1481 H. Affects in Dreams
1 [The last two sentences were added in 1919.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 481But a closer examination of some of these dreams brings something more
to light. In an indistinct part of the background of one of my laboratorydreams I was of an age which placed me precisely in the gloomiest andmost unsuccessful year of my medical career. I was still without a post andhad no idea how I could earn my living; but at the same time I suddenlydiscovered that I had a choice open to me between several women whomI might marry! So I was once more young, and, more than everything, she
was once more young—the woman who had shared all these difﬁcult yearswith me. The unconscious instigator of the dream was thus revealed as oneof the constantly gnawing wishes of a man who is growing older. The con-ﬂict raging in other levels of the mind between vanity and self-criticismhad, it is true, determined the content of the dream; but it was only themore deeply-rooted wish for youth that had made it possible for that con-ﬂict to appear as a dream. Even when we are awake we sometimes say toourselves: Things are going very well today and times were hard in the olddays; all the same, it was lovely then—I was still young.’
1
Another group of dreams,2which I have often come across in myself
and recognized as hypocritical, have as their content a reconciliation withpeople with whom friendly relations have long since ceased. In such casesanalysis habitually reveals some occasion which might urge me to aban-don the last remnant of consideration for these former friends and to treatthem as strangers or enemies. The dream, however, prefers to depict theopposite relationship. [Cf. p. 169 n.]
In forming any judgement upon dreams recorded by an imaginative
writer it is reasonable to suppose that he may have omitted from his ac-count details in the content of the dream which he regards as unessentialor distracting. His dreams will in that case raise problems which wouldbe quickly solved if their content were reported in full.482 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Footnote added 1930:] Since psycho-analysis has divided the per sonality into an
ego and super-ego (Freud, 1921c [and 1923b]), it has become easy to recognize
in these punishment dreams fulﬁllments of the wishes of the super-ego. [See be-
low, pp. 557 ff.—The Rosegger dreams are also discussed in Section IX of Freud,1923c. ]
2 [This paragraph was added in 1919, and seems to have been wrong ly interpo-
lated at this point. It should probably have come after the two next paragraphs.
These date from 1911, like the preceding Rosegger discussion, to which they areclearly related. What follows them goes back once more to 1900.—Some furtherremarks on hypocritical dreams will be found near the end of Section III ofFreud’s paper on a case of female homosexuality (1920 a.)]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 482Otto Rank has pointed out to me that the Grimms’ fairy tale of ‘The
Little Tailor, or Seven at a Blow’ contains an exactly similar dream of a par-
venu. The tailor, who has become a hero and the son-in-law of the King,
dreams one night of his former handicraft, as he lies beside his wife, the
Princess. She, becoming suspicious, posts armed guards the next night tolisten to the dreamer’s words and to arrest him. But the little tailor iswarned, and sees to it that his dream is corrected.
The complicated process of elimination, diminution and reversal, by
means of which the affects in the dream-thoughts are eventually turnedinto those in the dream, can be satisfactorily followed in suitable synthesesof dreams that have been completely analysed. I will quote a few more ex-amples of affects in dreams where some of the possibilities I have enumer-ated will be found realized.
v
If we turn back to the dream about the strange task set me by old
Brücke of making a dissection of my own pelvis [p. 459 f.], it will be re-called that in the dream itself I missed the gruesome feeling [ ‘Grauen’ ] ap-
propriate to it. Now this was a wish-fulﬁlment in more than one sense.The dissection meant the self-analysis which I was carrying out, as it were,in the publication of this present book about dreams—a process whichhad been so distressing to me in reality that I had postponed the printingof the ﬁnished manuscript for more than a year. A wish then arose that Imight get over this feeling of distaste; hence it was that I had no gruesomefeeling [ ‘Grauen’ ] in the dream. But I should also have been very glad to
miss growing grey— ‘Grauen’ in the other sense of the word. I was already
growing quite grey, and the grey of my hair was another reminder that Imust not delay any longer. And, as we have seen, the thought that I shouldhave to leave it to my children to reach the goal of my difﬁcult journeyforced its way through to representation at the end of the dream.
Let us next consider the two dreams in which an expression of satisfac-
tion was transposed to the moment after waking. In the one case the rea-son given for the satisfaction was an expectation that I should nowdiscover what was meant by ‘I’ve dreamt of that before,’ while the satisfac-tion really referred to the birth of my ﬁrst children [pp. 454 f.]. In the483 H. Affects in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 483other case the ostensible reason was my conviction that something that
had been ‘prognosticated’ was now coming true, while the real referencewas similar to that in the former dream: it was the satisfaction with whichI greeted the birth of my second son [pp. 455 f.] Here the affects whichdominated the dream-thoughts persisted in the dreams; but it is safe to saythat in no dream can things be as simple as all that. If we go a little more
deeply into the two analyses we ﬁnd that this satisfaction which had es-caped censorship had received an accession from another source. Thisother source had grounds for fearing the censorship, and its affect wouldundoubtedly have aroused opposition if it had not covered itself by thesimilar, legitimate affect of satisfaction, arising from the permissiblesource, and slipped in, as it were, under its wing.
Unfortunately, I cannot demonstrate this in the actual case of these
dreams, but an instance taken from another department of life will makemy meaning clear. Let us suppose the following case. There is a person ofmy acquaintance whom I hate, so that I have a lively inclination to feelglad if anything goes wrong with him. But the moral side of my nature willnot give way to this impulse. I do not dare to express a wish that he shouldbe unlucky, and if he meets with some undeserved misfortune, I suppressmy satisfaction at it and force myself to manifestations and thoughts of re-gret. Everyone must have found himself in this situation at some time orother. What now happens, however, is that the hated person, by a piece ofmisconduct of his own, involves himself in some well-deserved unpleasant-ness; when that happens, I may give free rein to my satisfaction that he hasmet with a just punishment and in this I ﬁnd myself in agreement withmany other people who are impartial. I may observe, however, that my sat-isfaction seems more intense than that of these other people; it has receivedan accession from the source of my hatred, which till then has been pre-vented from producing its affect, but in the altered circumstances is nolonger hindered from doing so. In social life this occurs in general whereverantipathetic people or members of an unpopular minority put themselvesin the wrong. Their punishment does not as a rule correspond to theirwrong-doing but to their wrong-doing plus the ill-feeling directed against
them which has previously been without any consequences. It is no doubttrue that those who inﬂict the punishment are committing an injustice inthis; but they are prevented from perceiving it by the satisfaction resultingfrom the removal of a suppression which has long been maintained withinthem. In cases such as this the affect is justiﬁed in its quality but not in its
amount; and self-criticism which is set at rest on the one point is only too484 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 484apt to neglect examination of the second one. When once a door has been
opened, it is easy for more people to push their way through it than therehad originally been any intention of letting in.
A striking feature in neurotic characters—the fact that a cause capable
of releasing an affect is apt to produce in them a result which is qualita-tively justiﬁed but quantita tively excessive—is to be explained along thesesame lines, in so far as it admits of any psychological explanation at all.The excess arises from sources of affect which had previously remained un-conscious and suppressed. These sources have succeeded in setting up anassociative link with the real releasing cause, and the desired path from the
release of their own affect has been opened by the other source of  affect,
which is unobjectionable and legitimate. Our attention is thus drawn tothe fact that in considering the suppressed and suppressing agencies, wemust not regard their relation as being exclusively one of mutual inhibi-tion. Just as much regard must be paid to cases in which the two agenciesbring about a pathological effect by working side by side and by intensify-ing each other.
Let us now apply these hints upon psychical mechanisms to an under-
standing of the expressions of affect in dreams. A satisfaction which is ex-
hibited in a dream and can, of course, be immediately referred to its properplace in the dream-thoughts is not always completely elucidated by this ref-erence alone. It is as a rule necessary to look for another source of it in the
dream-thoughts, a source which is under the pressure of the censorship. Asa result of that pressure, this source would normally have produced, not sat-isfaction, but the contrary affect. Owing to the presence of the ﬁrst sourceof affect, however, the second source is enabled to withdraw its affect of sat-isfaction from repression and allow it to act as an intensiﬁcation of the sat-isfaction from the ﬁrst source. Thus it appears that affects in dreams are fedfrom a conﬂuence of several sources and are overdetermined in their refer-ence to the material of the dream-thoughts. During the dream-work, sources
of affect which are capable of producing the same affect come together in gener-ating it.
1
We can gain a little insight into these complications from the analysis
of that ﬁne specimen of a dream of which the words ‘Non vixit ’ formed485 H. Affects in Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1909:] I have given an analogous explanation of the extraordi-
narily powerful pleasurable effect of tendentious jokes [Freud, 1905 c, towards
the end of Chapter IV.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 485the centre-point. (See pp. 430 ff.) In that dream manifestations of affect
of various qualities were brought together at two points in its manifestcontent. Hostile and distressing feelings—‘overcome by strange emo-tions’ were the words used in the dream itself—were piled up at the pointat which I annihilated my opponent and friend with two words. Andagain, at the end of the dream, I was highly delighted, and I went on toapprove the possibility, which in waking life I knew was absurd, of therebeing revenants who could be eliminated by a mere wish.
I have not yet related the exciting cause of the dream. It was of great
importance and led deep into an understanding of the dream. I had heardfrom my friend in Berlin, whom I have referred to as ‘Fl.’ [i.e. Fliess], thathe was about to undergo an operation and that I should get further newsof his condition from some of his relatives in Vienna. The ﬁrst reports Ireceived after the operation were not reassuring and made me feel anx-ious. I should have much preferred to go to him myself, but just at thattime I was the victim of a painful complaint which made movement ofany kind a torture to me. The dream-thoughts now informed me that Ifeared for my friend’s life. His only sister, whom I had never known, had,as I was aware, died in early youth after a very brief illness. (In the dreamFl. spoke about his sister and said that in three quarters of an hour she wasdead. ) I must have imagined that his constitution was not much more re-
sistant than his sister’s and that, after getting some much worse news ofhim, I should make the journey after all—and arrive too late, for which I
might never cease to reproach myself.
1This reproach for coming too late
became the central point of the dream but was represented by a scene inwhich Brücke, the honoured teacher of my student years, levelled this re-proach at me with a terrible look from his blue eyes. It will soon appearwhat it was that caused the situation [in regard to Fl.] to be switched onto these lines. The scene [with Brücke] itself could not be re produced bythe dream in the form in which I experienced it. The other ﬁgure in thedream was allowed to keep the blue eyes, but the annihilating role was al-lotted to me—a reversal which was obviously the work of wish- fulﬁlment.My anxiety about my friend’s recovery, my self-reproaches for not goingto see him, the shame I felt about this— he had come to Vienna (to see486 VI. The Dream-Work
1 It was this phantasy, forming part of the unconscious dream-thoughts, which so
insistently demanded ‘ Non vivit’ instead of ‘Non vixit’: ‘You have come too late,
he is no longer alive.’ I have already explained on pp. 430–1 that ‘Non vivit’ was
also required by the manifest situation in the dream.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 486me)‘unobtrusively’ —the need I felt to consider that I was excused by 
my  illness—all of this combined to produce the emotional storm which
was clearly perceived in my sleep and which raged in this region of thedream-thoughts.
But there was something else in the exciting cause of the dream, which
had a quite opposite effect upon me. Along with the unfavourable reportsduring the ﬁrst few days after the operation, I was given a warning not todiscuss the matter with anyone. I had felt offended by this because it im-plied an unnecessary distrust of my discretion. I was quite aware that theseinstructions had not emanated from my friend but were due to tactlessnessor over-anxiety on the part of the intermediary, but I was very disagreeablyaffected by the veiled reproach because it was—not wholly without justi-ﬁcation. As we all know, it is only reproaches which have something inthem that ‘stick’; it is only they that upset us. What I have in mind doesnot relate, it is true, to this friend, but to a much earlier period of my life.On that occasion I caused trouble between two friends (both of whom hadchosen to honour me, too, with that name) by quite unnecessarily tellingone of them, in the course of conversation, what the other had said abouthim. At that time, too, reproaches had been levelled at me, and they werestill in my memory. One of the two friends concerned was Professor Fleischl; I may describe the other by his ﬁrst name of ‘Josef ’—which wasalso that of P ., my friend and opponent in the dream.
1
The reproach of being unable to keep anything to myself was attested
in the dream by the element ‘unobtrusive’ and by Fl.’s question as to how
much I had told P . about his affairs. But it was the intervention of this
memory (of my early indiscretion and its consequences) that transportedthe reproach against me for coming too late from the present time to theperiod at which I had worked in Brucke’s laboratory. And, by turning the487 H. Affects in Dreams
1[What follows will be made more intelligible by some facts derived from a paper
by Bernfeld (1944). Freud worked at the Vienna Physiological Institute (‘Brücke’slaboratory’) from 1876 to 1882. Ernst Brücke (1819–92) was at its head; his twoassistants in Freud’s time were Sigmund Exner (1846–1925) and Ernst Fleischlvon Marxow (1846–91), both some ten years older than Freud. Fleischl sufferedfrom a very severe physical afﬂiction during the later years of his life. It was at thePhysiological Institute that Freud met Josef Breuer (1842–1925), his greatly seniorcollaborator in Studies on Hysteria (1895d ) and the second Josef in the present
analysis. The ﬁrst Josef—Freud’s early deceased ‘friend and op ponent P .’—wasJosef Paneth (1857–90) who succeeded to Freud’s position at the Institute.—Seealso the ﬁrst volume of Ernest Jones’s Freud biography.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 487second person in the scene of annihilation in the dream into a Josef, I
made the scene represent not only the reproach against me for comingtoo late but also the far more strongly repressed reproach that I was un-able to keep a secret. Here the processes of condensation and displace-ment at work in the dream, as well as the reasons for them, are strikinglyvisible.
My present-day anger, which was only slight, over the warning I had
been given not to give anything away [about Fl.’s illness] received rein-forcements from sources in the depth of my mind and thus swelled into acurrent of hostile feelings against persons of whom I was in reality fond.The source of this reinforcement ﬂowed from my childhood. I have alreadyshown [pp. 433 f.] how my warm friendships as well as my enmities withcontemporaries went back to my relations in childhood with a nephewwho was a year my senior; how he was my superior, how I early learned todefend myself against him, how we were inseparable friends, and how, ac-cording to the testimony of our elders, we sometimes fought with eachother and—made complaints to them about each other. All my friendshave in a certain sense been re-incarnations of this ﬁrst ﬁgure who ‘frühsich einst dem truben Blick gezeigt’
1: they have been revenants. My nephew
himself re-appeared in my boyhood, and at that time we acted the parts ofCaesar and Brutus together. My emotional life has always insisted that Ishould have an intimate friend and a hated enemy. I have always been ableto provide myself afresh with both, and it has not infrequently happenedthat the ideal situation of childhood has been so completely reproducedthat friend and enemy have come together in a single individual—thoughnot, of course, both at once or with constant oscillations, as may have beenthe case in my early childhood.
I do not propose at this point to discuss how it is that in such circum-
stances as these a recent occasion for the generation of an affect can harkback to an infantile situation and be replaced by that situation as far as theproduction of affect is concerned. [See p. 547.] This question forms partof the psychology of unconscious thinking, and would ﬁnd its properplace in a psychological elucidation of the neuroses. For the purposes ofdream-interpretation let us assume that a childhood memory arose, or wasconstructed in phantasy, with some such content as the following. Thetwo children had a dispute about some object. (What the object was may488 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [‘. . . long since appeared before my troubled gaze’ (Goethe, Faust, Dedication).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 488be left an open question, though the memory or pseudo-memory had a
quite speciﬁc one in view.) Each of them claimed to have got there beforethe other and therefore to have a better right to it. They came to blows andmight prevailed over right. On the evidence of the dream, I may myselfhave been aware that I was in the wrong (‘I myself noticed the mistake’ ).
However, this time I was the stronger and remained in possession of theﬁeld. The vanquished party hurried to his grandfather—my father—andcomplained about me, and I defended myself in the words which I knowfrom my father’s account: ‘I hit him ‘cos he hit me.’ This memory, ormore probably phantasy, which came into my mind while I was analysingthe dream—without further evidence I myself could not tell how
1—
 constituted an intermediate element in the dream-thoughts, which gath-ered up the emotions raging in them as a well collects the water that ﬂowsinto it. From this point the dream-thoughts proceeded along some suchlines as these: ‘It serves you right if you had to make way for me. Why didyou try to push me out of the way? I don’t need you, I can easily ﬁnd
someone else to play with,’ and so on. These thoughts now entered uponthe paths which led to their representation in the dream. There had beena time when I had had to reproach my friend Josef [P .] for an attitude ofthis same kind: ‘ Ôte-toi que je m’y mette!’ He had followed in my footsteps
as demonstrator in Brücke’s laboratory, but promotion there was slow andtedious. Neither of Brücke’s two assistants was inclined to budge from hisplace, and youth was impatient. My friend, who knew that he could notexpect to live long, and whom no bonds of intimacy attached to his im-mediate superior, sometimes gave loud expression to his impatience, and,since this superior [Fleischl] was seriously ill, P .’s wish to have him out ofthe way might have an uglier meaning than the mere hope for the man’spromotion. Not unnaturally, a few years earlier, I myself had nourished astill livelier wish to ﬁll a vacancy. Wherever there is rank and promotionthe way lies open for wishes that call for suppression. Shakespeare’s PrinceHal could not, even at his father’s sick-bed, resist the temptation of tryingon the crown. But, as was to be expected, the dream punished my friend,and not me, for this callous wish.
2489 H. Affects in Dreams
1 [This point is discussed below on p. 517.]
2 It will be noticed that the name Josef plays a great part in my dreams (cf. the
dream about my uncle [pp. 163 ff.]). My own ego ﬁnds it very easy to hide itself
behind people of that name, since Joseph was the name of a man famous in theBible as an interpreter of dreams.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 489‘As he was ambitious, I slew him.’ As he could not wait for the re-
moval of another man, he was himself removed. These had been my
thoughts immediately after I attended the unveiling at the University ofthe memorial—not to him but to the other man. Thus a part of the sat-isfaction I felt in the dream was to be interpreted: ‘A just punishment! Itserves you right!’
At my friend’s [P .’s] funeral, a young man had made what seemed to
be an inopportune remark to the effect that the speaker who had deliv-ered the funeral oration had implied that without this one man the worldwould come to an end. He was expressing the honest feelings of someonewhose pain was being interfered with by an exaggeration. But this remarkof his was the starting-point of the following dream-thoughts: ‘It’s quitetrue that no one’s irreplaceable. How many people I’ve followed to thegrave already! But I’m still alive. I’ve survived them all; I’m left in posses-sion of the ﬁeld.’ A thought of this kind, occurring to me at a moment atwhich I was afraid I might not ﬁnd my friend [Fl.] alive if I made thejourney to him, could only be construed as meaning that I was delightedbecause I had once more survived someone, because it was he and not I
who had died, because I was left in possession of the ﬁeld, as I had beenin the phantasied scene from my childhood. This satisfaction, infantile inorigin, at being in possession of the ﬁeld constituted the major part of theaffect that appeared in the dream. I was delighted to survive, and I gaveexpression to my delight with all the naïve egoism shown in the anecdoteof the married couple one of whom said to the other: ‘If one of us dies, Ishall move to Paris.’ So obvious was it to me that I should not be the oneto die.
It cannot be denied that to interpret and report one’s dreams demands
a high degree of self-discipline. One is bound to emerge as the only villainamong the crowd of noble characters who share one’s life. Thus it seemedto me quite natural that the revenants should only exist for just so long
as one likes and should be removable at a wish. We have seen what myfriend Josef was punished for. But the revenants were a series of reincar-
nations of the friend of my childhood. It was therefore also a source ofsatisfaction to me that I had always been able to ﬁnd successive substi-tutes for that ﬁgure; and I felt I should be able to ﬁnd a substitute for thefriend whom I was now on the point of losing: no one was irreplaceable.
But what had become of the dream-censorship? Why had it not raised
the most energetic objections against this blatantly egoistic train of thought?490 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 490And why had it not transformed the satisfaction attached to that train of
thought into severe unpleasure? The explanation was, I think, that other, un-objectionable trains of thought in connection with the same people foundsimultaneous satisfaction and screened with their affect the affect which
arose from the forbidden infantile source. In another stratum of mythoughts, during the ceremonial unveiling of the memorial, I had reﬂectedthus: ‘What a number of valued friends I have lost, some through death,some through a breach of our friendship! How fortunate that I have founda substitute for them and that I have gained one who means more to methan ever the others could, and that, at a time of life when new friendshipscannot easily be formed, I shall never lose his!’ My satisfaction at havingfound a substitute for these lost friends could be allowed to enter the dreamwithout interference; but there slipped in, along with it, the hostile satisfac-tion derived from the infantile source. It is no doubt true that infantile affection served to reinforce my contemporary and justiﬁed affection. Butinfantile hatred, too, succeeded in getting itself represented.
In addition to this, however, the dream contained a clear allusion to
another train of thought which could legitimately lead to satisfaction. Ashort time before, after long expectation, a daughter had been born to myfriend [Fl.]. I was aware of how deeply he had mourned the sister he hadso early lost and I wrote and told him I was sure he would transfer thelove he felt for her on to the child, and that the baby girl would allow himat last to forget his irreparable loss.
Thus this group of thoughts was connected once again with the inter-
mediate thought in the latent content of the dream [cf. pp. 488–9] fromwhich the associative paths diverged in contrary directions: ‘No one is irre-placeable!’ ‘There are nothing but revenants: all those we have lost come
back!’ And now the associative links between the contradictory componentsof the dream-thoughts were drawn closer by the chance fact that myfriend’s baby daughter had the same name as the little girl I used to playwith as a child, who was of my age and the sister of my earliest friend andopponent. [See p. 434 n .] It gave me great satisfaction when I heard that the
baby was to be called ‘Pauline.’ And as an allusion to this coincidence, I hadreplaced one Josef by another in the dream and found it impossible to sup-press the similarity between the opening letters of the names  ‘Fleischl’ and‘Fl.’ From here my thoughts went on to the subject of the names of my ownchildren. I had insisted on their names being chosen, not according to thefashion of the moment, but in memory of people I have been fond of.491 H. Affects in Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 491Their names made the children into revenants. And after all, I reﬂected, was
not having children our only path to immortality?
I have only a few more remarks to add on the subject of affect in
dreams from another point of view. A dominating element in a sleeper’s
mind may be constituted by what we call a ‘mood’—or tendency to some
affect—and this may then have a determining inﬂuence upon his dreams.A mood of this kind may arise from his experi ences or thoughts duringthe preceding day, or its sources may be somatic. [Cf. pp. 257 f.] In eithercase it will be accompanied by the trains of thought appropriate to it.From the point of view of dream-construction it is a matter of indiffer-ence whether, as sometimes happens, these ideational contents of thedream-thoughts determine the mood in a primary fashion, or whetherthey are themselves aroused secondarily by the dreamer’s emotional dis-position which is in its turn to be explained on a somatic basis. In anycase the construction of dreams is subject to the condition that it can onlyrepresent something which is the fulﬁlment of a wish and that it is onlyfrom wishes that it can derive its psy chical motive force. A currently ac-
tive mood is treated in the same way as a sensation arising and becomingcurrently active during sleep (cf. p. 254 f.), which can be either disre-garded or given a fresh interpretation in the sense of a wish-fulﬁlment.Distressing moods during sleep can become the motive force of a dreamby arousing energetic wishes which the dream is supposed to fulﬁl. Thematerial to which moods are attached is worked over until it can be usedto express the fulﬁlment of a wish. The more intense and dominating apart is played in the dream-thoughts by the distressing mood, the morecertain it becomes that the most strongly suppressed wishful impulses willmake use of the opportunity in order to achieve representation. For, sincethe unpleasure which they would otherwise necessarily produce them-selves is already present, they ﬁnd the harder part of their task—the taskof forcing their way through to representation—already accomplished forthem. Here once more we are brought up against the problem of anxiety-dreams; and these, as we shall ﬁnd, form a marginal case in the functionof dreaming. [Cf. pp. 579 ff.]492 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 492(I)
SECONDARY REVISION1
And now at last we can turn to the fourth of the factors concerned in
the construction of dreams. If we pursue our investigation of the content
of dreams in the manner in which we have begun it—that is, by compar-ing conspicuous events in the dream-content with their sources in thedream-thoughts, we shall come upon elements the explanation of whichcalls for an entirely new assumption. What I have in mind are cases inwhich the dreamer is surprised, annoyed or repelled in the dream, and,moreover, by a piece of the dream-content itself. As I have shown in anumber of instances (in the last section), the majority of these criticalfeelings in dreams are not in fact directed against the content of thedream, but turn out to be portions of the dream-thoughts which havebeen taken over and used to an appropriate end. But some material of thiskind does not lend itself to this explanation; its correlate in the materialof the dream-thoughts is nowhere to be found. What, for instance, is themeaning of a critical remark found so often in dreams: ‘This is only adream’? [See p. 353.] Here we have a genuine piece of criticism of thedream, such as might be made in waking life. Quite frequently, too, it isactually a prelude to waking up; and still more frequently it has been pre-ceded by some distressing feeling which is set at rest by the recognitionthat the state is one of dreaming. When the thought ‘this is only a dream’occurs during a dream, it has the same purpose in view as when the wordsare pronounced on the stage by la belle Hélène in Offenbach’s comic
opera of that name:
2it is aimed at reducing the importance of what has
just been experienced and at making it possible to tolerate what is to fol-low. It serves to lull a particular agency to sleep which would have everyreason at that moment to bestir itself and forbid the continuance of the493 I. Secondary Revision
1 [‘Sekundäre Bearbeitung.’ This term has previously been given the somewhat
misleading English rendering of ‘secondary elaboration.’]
2 [In the love duet between Paris and Helen in the second act, at the end of which
they are surprised by Menelaus.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 493dream—or the scene in the opera. It is more comfortable, however, to go
on sleeping and tolerate the dream, because, after all, ‘it is only a dream.’In my view the con temptuous critical judgement, ‘it’s only a dream,’ ap-pears in a dream when the censorship, which is never quite asleep, feelsthat it has been taken unawares by a dream which has already been al-lowed through. It is too late to suppress it, and accordingly the censorshipuses these words to meet the anxiety of the distressing feeling aroused byit. The phrase is an example of esprit d’escalier on the part of the psychical
censorship.
This instance, however, provides us with convincing evidence that not
everything contained in a dream is derived from the dream-thoughts, butthat contributions to its content may be made by a psychical functionwhich is indistinguishable from our waking thoughts. The question nowarises whether this only occurs in exceptional cases, or whether the psy-chical agency which otherwise operates only as a censorship plays a habit-
ual part in the construction of dreams.
We can have no hesitation in deciding in favour of the second alterna-
tive. There can be no doubt that the censoring agency, whose inﬂuence wehave so far only recognized in limitations and omissions in the dream- content, is also responsible for interpolations and additions in it. The in-terpolations are easy to recognize. They are often reported with hesitation,and introduced by an ‘as though’; they are not in themselves particularlyvivid and are always introduced at points at which they can serve as linksbetween two portions of the dream-content or to bridge a gap between twoparts of the dream. They are less easily retained in the memory than gen-uine derivatives of the material of the dream-thoughts; if the dream is to beforgotten they are the ﬁrst part of it to disappear, and I have a strong suspi-cion that the common complaint of having dreamt a lot, but of having for-gotten most of it and of having only retained fragments [p. 297], is basedupon the rapid disappearance precisely of these connecting thoughts. In acomplete analysis these interpolations are sometimes betrayed by the factthat no material connected with them is to be found in the dream-thoughts. But careful examination leads me to regard this as the less fre-quent case; as a rule the connecting thoughts lead back nevertheless tomaterial in the dream-thoughts, but to material which could have no claimto acceptance in the dream either on its own account or owing to its beingoverdetermined. Only in extreme cases, it seems, does the psychical func-tion in dream-formation which we are now considering proceed to make494 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 494new creations. So long as possible, it employs anything appropriate that it
can ﬁnd in the material of the dream-thoughts.
The thing that distinguishes and at the same time reveals this part of
the dream-work1is its purpose. This function behaves in the manner which
the poet maliciously ascribes to philosophers: it ﬁlls up the gaps in thedream-structure with shreds and patches.
2As a result of its efforts, the
dream loses its appearance of absurdity and disconnectedness and approx-imates to the model of an intelligible experience. But its efforts are not al-ways crowned with success. Dreams occur which, at a superﬁcial view, mayseem faultlessly logical and reasonable; they start from a possible situation,carry it on through a chain of consistent modiﬁcations and—though farless frequently—bring it to a conclusion which causes no surprise. Dreamswhich are of such a kind have been subjected to a far-reaching revision bythis psychical function that is akin to waking thought; they appear to havea meaning, but that meaning is as far removed as possible from their truesigniﬁcance. If we analyse them, we can convince ourselves that it is inthese dreams that the secondary revision has played about with the mate-rial the most freely, and has retained the relations present in that materialto the least extent. They are dreams which might be said to have been al-ready interpreted once, before being submitted to waking interpretation.
3
In other dreams this tendentious revision has only partly succeeded; coher-ence seems to rule for a certain distance, but the dream then becomessenseless or confused, while perhaps later on in its course it may for a sec-ond time present an appearance of rationality. In yet other dreams the re-vision has failed altogether; we ﬁnd ourselves helplessly face to face with ameaningless heap of fragmentary material.
I do not wish to deny categorically that this fourth power in dream-
 construction—which we shall soon recognize as an old acquaintance, sincein fact it is the only one of the four with which we are familiar in other connections—I do not wish to deny that this fourth factor has the capacity495 I. Secondary Revision
1 [Elsewhere Freud remarks that, strictly speaking, ‘secondary revi sion’ is not a
part of the dream-work. Cf. his article on ‘Psycho-Analysis’ in Marcuse’s Hand-
wörterbuch (Freud, 1923a , end of paragraph on ‘The Interpretation of Dreams.’)
This same point is also mentioned towards the end of Freud (1913 a).]
2 [An allusion to some lines in Heine’s ‘Die Heimkehr’ (LVIII). The whole pas-
sage is quoted by Freud near the beginning of the last of his New Introductory
Lectures (1933a).]
3 [See, for instance, the dreams recorded on pp. 598 f. and 581.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 495to create new contributions to dreams. It is certain, however, that, like the
others, it exerts its inﬂuence principally by its preferences and selectionsfrom psychical material in the dream-thoughts that has already beenformed. Now there is one case in which it is to a great extent spared thelabour of, as it were, building up a façade for the dream—the case, namely,in which a formation of that kind already exists, available for use in the ma-terial of the dream-thoughts. I am in the habit of describing the element inthe dream-thoughts which I have in mind as a ‘phantasy.’
1I shall perhaps
avoid misunderstanding if I mention the ‘day-dream’ as something analo-gous to it in waking life.
2The part played in our mental life by these struc-
tures has not yet been fully recognized and elucidated by psychiatrists,though M. Benedikt has made what seems to me a very promising start inthat direction.
3The importance of day-dreams has not escaped the un -
erring vision of imaginative writers; there is, for instance, a well-known ac-count by Alphonse Daudet in Le Nabab of the day-dreams of one of theminor characters in that story. [Cf. p. 536 f.] The study of the psycho -neuroses leads to the surprising discovery that these phantasies or day-dreams are the immediate fore-runners of hysterical symptoms, or at least ofa whole number of them. Hysterical symptoms are not attached to actualmemories, but to phantasies erected on the basis of memories.
4The frequent
occurrence of conscious daytime phantasies brings these structures to ourknowledge; but just as there are phantasies of this kind which are conscious,so, too, there are unconscious ones in great numbers, which have to remainunconscious on account of their content and of their origin from repressedmaterial. Closer investigation of the characteristics of these daytime phan-tasies shows us how right it is that these formations should bear the samename as we give to the products of our thought during the night—the496 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [‘Phantasie.’ This German word was earlier used only to mean ‘imagination’;
‘Phantasiebildung’ (‘imaginative formation’) would have been used here.]
2 ‘Rêve,’ ‘petit roman,’—‘day-dream,’ ‘[continuous] story.’ [These last words are in
English in the original. The term ‘T agtraum, ’ used in the text above, was unfa-
miliar to German readers and called for elucidation.]
3 [Freud himself later devoted two papers to the subject of day dreams: 1908 aand
1908e . In 1921 The Psychology of Day-Dreams was published by J. Varendonck,
to which Freud provided an introduction (Freud, 1921 b).]
4 [This was expressed by Freud more trenchantly in a memorandum accompanying
his letter to Fliess of May 2, 1897 (Freud, 1950 a, Draft L): ‘Phantasies are psy-
chical façades constructed in order to bar the way to these memories [of primal
scenes].’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 496name, that is, of ‘dreams.’ They share a large number of their properties with
night-dreams, and their investigation might, in fact, have served as the short-est and best approach to an understanding of night-dreams.
Like dreams, they are wish-fulﬁllments; like dreams, they are based to
a great extent on impressions of infantile experiences; like dreams, theybeneﬁt by a certain degree of relaxation of censorship. If we examine theirstructure, we shall perceive the way in which the wishful purpose that isat work in their production has mixed up the material of which they arebuilt, has re-arranged it and has formed it into a new whole. They standin much the same relation to the childhood memories from which theyare derived as do some of the Baroque palaces of Rome to the ancient ruins whose pavements and columns have provided the material for themore recent structures.
The function of ‘secondary revision,’ which we have attributed to the
fourth of the factors concerned in shaping the content of dreams, showsus in operation once more the activity which is able to ﬁnd free vent inthe creation of day-dreams without being inhibited by any other inﬂu-ences. We might put it simply by saying that this fourth factor of oursseeks to mould the material offered to it into something like a day-dream.If, however, a day-dream of this kind has already been formed within thenexus of the dream-thoughts, this fourth factor in the dream-work willprefer to take possession of the ready-made day-dream and seek to intro-duce it into the content of the dream. There are some dreams which con-sist merely in the repetition of a daytime phantasy which may perhapshave remained unconscious:
1such, for instance, as the boy’s dream of
driving in a war-chariot with the heroes of the T rojan War [p. 154]. Inmy ‘Autodidasker’ dream [pp. 316 ff.] the second part at all events was afaithful reproduction of a daytime phantasy, innocent in itself, of a con-versation with Professor N. In view of the complicated conditions whicha dream has to satisfy when it comes into existence, it happens more fre-quently that the ready-made phantasy forms only a portion of the dream,
or that only a portion of the phantasy forces its way into the dream.Thereafter, the phantasy is treated in general like any other portion of thelatent material, though it often remains recognizable as an entity in thedream. There are often parts of my dreams which stand out as producing497 I. Secondary Revision
1 [Cf. the long footnote to the section on ‘The Barrier against Incest’ near the end
of the third of Freud’s Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d ). This foot-
note was added in the Fourth Edition of that book (1920).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 497a different impression from the rest. They strike me as being, as it were,
more ﬂuent, more connected and at the same time more ﬂeeting thanother parts of the same dream. These, I know, are unconscious phantasieswhich have found their way into the fabric of the dream, but I have neversucceeded in pinning down a phantasy of this kind. Apart from this, thesephantasies, like any other component of the dream-thoughts, are com-pressed, condensed, superimposed on one another, and so on. There are,however, transitional cases, between the case in which they constitute thecontent (or at least the façade) of the dream unaltered and the extremeopposite, in which they are represented in the content of the dream onlyby one of their elements or by a distant allusion. What happens to phan-
tasies present in the dream-thoughts is evidently also determined by anyadvantages they may have to offer the requirements of the censorship andof the urge towards condensation.
In selecting examples of dream-interpretation I have so far as possible
avoided dreams in which unconscious phantasies play any considerablepart, because the introduction of this particular psychical element wouldhave necessitated lengthy discussions on the psychology of unconsciousthinking. Nevertheless, I cannot completely escape a consideration of phan -tasies in this connection, since they often make their way complete intodreams and since still more often clear glimpses of them can be seen behindthe dream. I will therefore quote one more dream, which seems to be com-posed of two different and opposing phantasies which coincide with eachother at a few points and of which one is superﬁcial while the second is, asit were, an interpretation of the ﬁrst. [See above p. 495].
1
The dream—it is the only one of which I possess no careful notes—
ran roughly as follows. The dreamer, a young unmarried man, was sitting498 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Footnote added 1909:] In my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’
(1905e [Part II]), I have analysed a good specimen of a dream of this sort, made
up of a number of superimposed phantasies. Incidentally, I underestimated the
importance of the part played by these phantasies in the formation of dreams solong as I was principally working on my own dreams, which are usually basedon discussions and conﬂicts of thought and comparatively rarely on day-dreams.In the case of other people it is often much easier to demonstrate the completeanalogy between night-dreams and day-dreams. With hysterical patients, a hys-terical attack can often be replaced by a dream; and it is then easy to convinceone self that the immediate forerunner of both these psychical structures was a
day-dream phantasy.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 498in the restaurant at which he usually ate and which was presented realis-
tically in the dream. Several people then appeared, in order to fetch himaway, and one of them wanted to arrest him. He said to his companionsat table: ‘I’ll pay later; I’ll come back.’ But they exclaimed with derisivesmiles: ‘We know all about that; that’s what they all say!’ One of theguests called out after him: ‘There goes another one!’ He was then ledinto a narrow room in which he found a female ﬁgure carrying a child.One of the people accompanying him said: ‘This is Herr Müller.’ A po-lice inspector, or some such ofﬁcial, was turning over a bundle of cards orpapers and as he did so repeated ‘Müller, Müller, Müller.’ Finally he askedthe dreamer a question, which he answered with an ‘I will.’ He thenturned round to look at the female ﬁgure and observed that she was nowwearing a big beard.
Here there is no difﬁculty in separating the two components. The su-
perﬁcial one was a phantasy of arrest which appears as though it had been
freshly constructed by the dream-work. But behind it some material is vis-ible which had been only slightly re-shaped by the dream-work: a phantasy
of marriage. Those features which were common to both phantasies emergewith special clarity, in the same way as in one of Galton’s composite pho-tographs. The promise made by the young man (who up till then had beena bachelor) that he would come back and join his  fellow-diners, at theirtable, the scepticism of his boon-companions (whom experience had taughtbetter), the exclamation ‘there goes another one [to get married]’—all ofthese features ﬁtted in easily with the alternative interpretation. So, too, didthe ‘I will’ with which he replied to the ofﬁcial’s question. The turning overthe bundle of papers, with the constant repetition of the same name corre-sponded to a less important but recognizable feature of wedding festivities,namely the reading out of a bundle of telegrams of congratulation, all ofthem with addresses bearing the same names. The phantasy of marriage ac-tually scored a victory over the covering phantasy of arrest in the fact of thebride’s making a personal appearance in the dream. I was able to discoverfrom an enquiry—the dream was not analysed—why it was that at the endof it the bride wore a beard. On the previous day the dreamer had beenwalking in the street with a friend who was as shy of marrying as he washimself, and he had drawn his friend’s attention to a darkhaired beauty whohad passed them. ‘Yes,’ his friend had remarked, ‘if only women like thatdidn’t grow beards like their fathers’ in a few years’ time.’ This dream didnot, of course, lack elements in which dream-distortion had been carrieddeeper. It may well be, for instance, that the words ‘I’ll pay later’ referred to499 I. Secondary Revision9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 499what he feared might be his father-in-law’s attitude on the subject of a
dowry. In fact, all kinds of qualms were evidently preventing the dreamerfrom throwing himself into the phantasy of marriage with any enjoyment.One of these qualms, a fear that marriage might cost him his freedom, wasembodied in the transformation into a scene of arrest.
If we return for a moment to the point that the dream-work is glad to
make use of a ready-made phantasy instead of putting one together outof the material of the dream-thoughts, we may perhaps ﬁnd ourselves ina position to solve one of the most interesting puzzles connected withdreams. On pp. 58 f. I told the well-known anecdote of how Maury, hav-ing been struck in his sleep on the back of his neck by a piece of wood,woke up from a long dream which was like a full-length story set in thedays of the French Revolution. Since the dream, as reported, was a coher-ent one and was planned entirely with an eye to providing an explanationof the stimulus which woke him and whose occurrence he could not haveanticipated, the only possible hypothesis seems to be that the whole elab-orate dream must have been composed and must have taken place duringthe short period of time between the contact of the board with Maury’scervical vertebrae and his consequent awakening. We should never dareto attribute such rapidity to thought-activity in waking life, and weshould therefore be driven to conclude that the dream-work possesses theadvantage of accelerating our thought-processes to a remarkable degree.
Strong objections have been raised to what quickly became a popular
conclusion by some more recent writers (Le Lorrain, 1894 and 1895, Egger, 1895, and others). On the one hand they throw doubts upon theaccuracy of Maury’s account of his dream; and on the other hand they at-tempt to show that the rapidity of the operations of our waking thoughtsis no less than in this dream when exaggerations have been discounted.The discussion raised questions of principle which do not seem to me im-mediately soluble. But I must confess that the arguments brought forward(by Egger, for instance), particularly against Maury’s guillotine dream,leave me unconvinced. I myself would propose the following explanationof this dream. Is it so highly improbable that Maury’s dream represents aphantasy which had been stored up ready-made in his memory for manyyears and which was aroused—or I would rather say ‘alluded to’—at themoment at which he became aware of the stimulus which woke him? Ifthis were so, we should have escaped the whole difﬁculty of understandinghow such a long story with all its details could have been composed in the500 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 500extremely short period of time which was at the dreamer’s disposal—for
the story would have been composed already. If the piece of wood hadstruck the back of Maury’s neck while he was awake, there would havebeen an opportunity for some such thought as: ‘That’s just like being guil-lotined.’ But since it was in his sleep that he was struck by the board, thedream-work made use of the impinging stimulus in order rapidly to pro-duce a wish-fulﬁlment; it was as though it thought (this is to be taken
purely ﬁguratively) : ‘Here’s a good opportunity of realizing a wishfulphantasy which was formed at such and such a time in the course of read-ing.’ It can hardly be disputed, I think, that the dream-story was preciselyof a sort likely to be constructed by a young man under the inﬂuence ofpowerfully exciting impressions. Who—least of all what Frenchman orstudent of the history of civilization—could fail to be gripped by narra-tives of the Reign of Terror, when the men and women of the aristocracy,the ﬂower of the nation, showed that they could die with a cheerful mindand could retain the liveliness of their wit and the elegance of their man-ners till the very moment of the fatal summons? How tempting for ayoung man to plunge into all this in his imagination—to picture himselfbidding a lady farewell—kissing her hand and mounting the scaffold un-afraid! Or, if ambition were the prime motive of the phantasy, how tempt-ing for him to take the place of one of those formidable ﬁgures who, bythe power alone of their thoughts and ﬂaming eloquence, ruled the city inwhich the heart of humanity beat convulsively in those days—who wereled by their convictions to send thousands of men to their death and whoprepared the way for the transformation of Europe, while all the time theirown heads were insecure and destined to fall one day beneath the knife ofthe guillotine—how tempting to picture himself as one of the Girondists,perhaps, or as the heroic Danton! There is one feature in Maury’s recol-lection of the dream, his being ‘led to the place of execution, surroundedby an immense mob,’ which seems to suggest that his phantasy was in factof this ambitious type.
Nor is it necessary that this long-prepared phantasy should have been
gone through during sleep; it would have been sufﬁcient for it to be merelytouched on. What I mean is this. If a few bars of music are played andsomeone comments that it is from Mozart’s Figaro (as happens in Don
Giovanni ) a number of recollections are roused in me all at once, none of
which can enter my consciousness singly at the ﬁrst moment. The key-phrase serves as a port of entry through which the whole network is simul-taneously put in a state of excitation. It may well be the same in the case501 I. Secondary Revision9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 501of unconscious thinking. The rousing stimulus excites the psychical port
of entry which allows access to the whole guillotine phantasy. But thephantasy is not gone through during sleep but only in the recollection ofthe sleeper after his awakening. After waking he remembers in all its detailsthe phantasy which was stirred up as a whole in his dream. One has nomeans of assuring oneself in such a case that one is really rememberingsomething one has dreamt This same explanation—that it is a ques tion ofready-made phantasies which are brought into excitation as a whole by therousing stimulus—can be applied to other dreams which are focused upona rousing stimulus, such, for instance, as Napoleon’s battle dream beforethe explosion of the infernal machine [pp. 58 and 252 f.].
Among the dreams
1collected by Justine Tobowolska in her disserta-
tion on the apparent passage of time in dreams, the most informativeseems to me to be the one reported by Macario (1857, 46) as having beendreamt by a dramatic author, Casimir Bonjour. One evening Bonjourwanted to attend the ﬁrst performance of one of his pieces; but he was sofatigued that as he was sitting behind the scenes he dozed off just at themoment the curtain went up. During his sleep he went through thewhole ﬁve acts of the play, and observed all the various signs of emotionshown by the audience during the different scenes. At the end of the per-formance he was delighted to hear his name being shouted with the liveli-est demonstrations of applause. Suddenly he woke up. He could notbelieve either his eyes or his ears, for the performance had not gone be-yond the ﬁrst few lines of the ﬁrst scene; he could not have been asleepfor longer than two minutes. It is surely not too rash to suppose in thecase of this dream that the dreamer’s going through all ﬁve acts of theplay and observing the attitude of the public to different passages in itneed not have arisen from any fresh production of material during hissleep, but may have reproduced a piece of phantasy-activity (in the senseI have described) which had already been completed. Tobowolska, likeother writers, emphasizes the fact that dreams with an accelerated passageof ideas have the common characteristic of seeming specially coherent,quite unlike other dreams, and that the recollection of them is summaryfar more than detailed. This would indeed be a characteristic whichready-made phantasies of this kind, touched upon by the dream-work,would be bound to possess, though this is a conclusion which the writers502 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [This paragraph was added in 1914 with the exception of the last sentence,
which appeared in the original edition.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 502in question fail to draw. I do not assert, however, that all arousal dreams
admit of this explanation, or that the problem of the accelerated passage
of ideas in dreams can be entirely dismissed in this fashion.
At this point it is impossible to avoid considering the relation between
this secondary revision of the content of dreams and the remaining factorsof the dream-work. Are we to suppose that what happens is that in the ﬁrstinstance the dream-constructing factors—the tendency towards conden-sation, the necessity for evading the censorship, and considerations of rep-resentability by the psychical means open to dreams—put together aprovisional dream-content out of the material provided, and that this con-tent is subsequently re-cast so as to conform so far as possible to the de-mands of a second agency? This is scarcely probable. We must assumerather that from the very ﬁrst the demands of this second factor constituteone of the conditions which the dream must satisfy and that this condi-tion, like those laid down by condensation, the censorship imposed by re-sistance, and representability, operates simultaneously in a conducive andselective sense upon the mass of material present in the dream-thoughts.In any case, however, of the four conditions for the formation of dreams,the one we have come to know last is the one whose demands appear tohave the least cogent inﬂuence on dreams.
The following consideration makes it highly probable that the psychi-
cal function which carries out what we have described as the secondaryrevision of the content of dreams is to be identiﬁed with the activity ofour waking thought. Our waking (preconscious
1) thinking behaves to-
wards any perceptual material with which it meets in just the same wayin which the function we are considering behaves towards the content ofdreams. It is the nature of our waking thought to establish order in mate-rial of that kind, to set up relations in it and to make it conform to ourexpectations of an intelligible whole. [Cf. pp. 60 f. and 76.] In fact, wego too far in that direction. An adept in sleight of hand can trick us byrelying upon this intellectual habit of ours. In our efforts at making an in-telligible pattern of the sense-impressions that are offered to us, we oftenfall into the strangest errors or even falsify the truth about the materialbefore us.503 I. Secondary Revision
1 [Freud’s ﬁrst published use of the term seems to occur on p. 352; it is explained
below on pp. 542 f. It appears as early as December 6, 1896, in his correspon-
dence with Fliess (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 52).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 503The evidences of this are too universally known for there to be any
need to insist upon them further. In our reading we pass over misprints
which destroy the sense, and have the illusion that what we are reading iscorrect. The editor of a popular French periodical is said to have made abet that he would have the words ‘in front’ or ‘behind’ inserted by theprinter in every sentence of a long article without a single one of his read-ers noticing it. He won his bet. Many years ago I read in a newspaper acomic instance of a false connection. On one occasion during a sitting ofthe French Chamber a bomb thrown by an anarchist exploded in theChamber itself and Dupuy subdued the consequent panic with the coura-geous words: ‘La séance continue.’ The visitors in the gallery were asked togive their impressions as witnesses of the outrage. Among them were twomen from the provinces. One of these said that it was true that he hadheard a detonation at the close of one of the speeches but had assumedthat it was a parliamentary usage to ﬁre a shot each time a speaker satdown. The second one, who had probably already heard several speeches,
had come to the same conclusion, except that he supposed that a shot wasonly ﬁred as a tribute to a particularly successful speech.
There is no doubt, then, that it is our normal thinking that is the psy-
chical agency which approaches the content of dreams with a demand thatit must be intelligible, which subjects it to a ﬁrst interpretation and whichconsequently produces a complete misunderstanding of it. [See p. 495.]For the purposes of our interpretation it remains an essential rule invari-
ably to leave out of account the ostensible continuity of a dream as beingof suspect origin, and to follow the same path back to the material of thedream-thoughts, no matter whether the dream itself is clear or confused.
We now perceive, incidentally, on what it is that the range in the qual-
ity of dreams between confusion and clarity which was discussed on p.346 depends. Those parts of a dream on which the secondary revision hasbeen able to produce some effect are clear, while those parts on which itsefforts have failed are confused. Since the confused parts of a dream areso often at the same time the less vivid parts, we may conclude that thesecondary dream-work is also to be held responsible for a contribution tothe plastic intensity of the different dream-elements.
If I look around for something with which to compare the ﬁnal form
assumed by a dream as it appears after normal thought has made its con-tribution, I can think of nothing better than the enigmatic inscriptionswith which Fliegende Blätter has for so long entertained its readers. They
are intended to make the reader believe that a certain sentence—for the504 VI. The Dream-Work9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 504sake of contrast, a sentence in dialect and as scurrilous as possible—is a
Latin inscription. For this purpose the letters contained in the words aretorn out of their combination into syllables and arranged in a new order.Here and there a genuine Latin word appears; at other points we seem tosee abbreviations of Latin words before us; and at still other points inthe inscription we may allow ourselves to be deceived into overlooking thesenselessness of isolated letters by parts of the inscription seeming to be de-faced or showing lacunae. If we are to avoid being taken in by the joke, wemust disregard everything that makes it seem like an inscription, lookﬁrmly at the letters, pay no attention to their ostensible arrangement, andso combine them into words belonging to our own mother tongue.
1
Secondary revision2is the one factor in the dream-work which has
been observed by the majority of writers on the subject and of which thesigniﬁcance has been appreciated. Havelock Ellis (1911, 10–11) has givenan amusing account of its functioning: ‘Sleeping consciousness we mayeven imagine as saying to itself in effect: “Here comes our master, WakingConsciousness, who attaches such mighty importance to reason and logicand so forth. Quick! gather things up, put them in order—any order willdo—before he enters to take possession.”’
The identity of its method of working with that of waking thought has
been stated with particular clarity by Delacroix (1904, 926): ‘Cette fonc-tion d’interprétation n’est pas particulière au rêve; c’est le même travail decoordination logique que nous faisons sur nos sensations pendant laveille.’
3James Sully [1893, 355–6] is of the same opinion. So, too, is To-
bowolska (1900, 93): ‘Sur ces successions incohérentes d’hallucinations,l’esprit s’efforce de faire le même travail de coordination logique qu’il fait505 I. Secondary Revision
1 [An instance of the operation of the process of secondary revision in the case of
a fairy-tale is given on p. 261 f. and in the case of Oedipus Rex on p. 282. Its ap-
plication to obsessions and phobias is mentioned on p. 262, and to paranoia inLecture XXIV of Freud’s Introductory Lectures (1916–17). An example of sec-
ondary revision in a telegraphic error is recorded in Chapter VI (No. 19) of The
Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b ). The analogy between the secondary re-
vision of dreams and the formation of ‘systems’ of thought is discussed at somelength in Chapter III, Section 4, of Totem and T aboo (1912–13).]
2 [The remainder of this chapter, with the exception of the last para graph, which
was in the original edition, was added in 1914.]
3[‘This interpretative function is not peculiar to dreams. It is the same work of log-
ical co-ordination which we carry out upon our sensations while we are awake.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 505pendant la veille sur les sensations. Il relie entre elles par un lien imaginaire
toutes ces images décousues et bouche les écarts trop grands qui se trou-vaient entre elles.’
1
According to some writers, this process of arranging and interpreting
begins during the dream itself and is continued after waking. Thus Paul-han (1894, 546): ‘Cependant j’ai souvent pensé qu’il pouvait y avoir unecertaine déformation, ou plutôt reformation, du rêve dans le souvenir. . . .La tendence systématisante de l’imagination pourrait fort bien acheveraprès le réveil ce qu’elle a ébauché pendant le sommeil. De la sorte, la ra-pidité réelle de la pensée serait augmentée en apparence par les perfection-nements dus à l’imagination éveillée.’
2Bernard-Leroy and Tobowolska
(1901, 592): ‘Dans le rêve, au contraire, l’interprétation et la coordina-tion se font non seulement à l’aide des données du rêve, mais encore àl’aide de celles de la veille. . . .’
3
Inevitably, therefore, this one recognized factor in the formation of
dreams has had its importance overestimated, so that it has been creditedwith the whole achievement of the creation of dreams. This act of cre-ation, as Goblot (1896, 288 f.) and still more Foucault (1906) suppose,is performed at the moment of waking; for these two writers attribute towaking thought an ability to construct a dream out of the thoughts thatemerge during sleep. Bernard-Leroy and Tobowolska (1901) commenton this view: ‘On a cru pouvoir placer le rêve au moment du réveil, et ilsont attribué à la pensée de la veille la fonction de construire le rêve avecles images présentes dans la pensée du sommeil.’
4506 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [‘The mind endeavours to carry out upon these incoherent trains of hallucina-
tions the same work of logical co-ordination that it carries out upon sensations
during the daytime. It connects up all these detached images by an imaginarylink and stops up any excessively wide gaps between them.’]
2 [‘I have often thought, however, that dreams may be to some extent misshaped,
or rather reshaped, in memory. . . . The tendency of the imagination towardssystematization might very well complete after waking what it had started uponin sleep. In that way the real speed of thought would be given an apparent in-crease by the improvements due to the waking imagination.’]
3 [‘In a dream, on the contrary, interpretation and co-ordination are carried out
by the help not only of the data presented in the dream, but of the data availablein waking life. . . .’]
4 [‘It has been thought possible to locate dreams at the moment of waking, and
[these authors] have ascribed to waking thought the function of constructingdreams out of the images present in sleeping thought.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 506From this discussion of secondary revision I will go on to consider a
further factor in the dream-work which has recently been brought to light
by some ﬁnely perceptive observations carried out by Herbert Silberer. AsI have mentioned earlier (pp. 358 ff.), Silberer has, as it were, caught inthe very act the process of transforming thoughts into images, by forcinghimself into intellectual activity while he was in a state of fatigue anddrowsiness. At such moments the thought with which he was dealingvanished and was replaced by a vision which turned out to be a substitutefor what were as a rule abstract thoughts. (Cf. the examples in the passagejust referred to.) Now it happened during these experiments that the im-age which arose, and which might be compared to an element of a dream,sometimes represented something other than the thought that was beingdealt with—namely, the fatigue itself, the difﬁculty and unpleasure in-volved in the work. It represented, that is to say, the subjective state andmode of functioning of the person making the effort instead of the objectof his efforts. Silberer described occurrences of this kind, which were veryfrequent in his case, as a ‘functional phenomenon’ in contrast to the ‘ma-terial phenomenon’ which would have been expected.
For instance: ‘One afternoon I was lying on my sofa feeling extremely
sleepy; nevertheless I forced myself to think over a philosophical problem.I wanted to compare the views of Kant and Schopenhauer upon Time.As a result of my drowsiness I was unable to keep the arguments of bothof them before my mind at once, which was necessary in order to makethe comparison. After a number of vain attempts, I once more impressedKant’s deductions upon my mind with all the strength of my will, so thatI might apply them to Schopenhauer’s statement of the problem. I thendirected my attention to the latter; but when I tried to turn back again toKant, I found that his argument had once more escaped me and I triedvainly to pick it up once more. This vain effort at recovering the Kantdossier which was stored away somewhere in my head was suddenly rep-
resented before my closed eyes as a concrete and plastic symbol, as thoughit were a dream-picture: I was asking for information from a disobliging sec-
retary who was bent over his writing-table and refused to put himself out atmy insistent demand. He half straightened himself and gave me a disagreeableand uncomplying look.’ (Silberer, 1909, 513 f. [Freud’s italics.])
Here are some other instances, which relate to the oscillation between
sleeping and waking:
‘Example No. 2.—Circumstances: In the morning, at waking. While I
was at a certain depth of sleep (a twilight state) and reﬂecting over a previous507 I. Secondary Revision9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 507dream and in a sort of way continuing to dream it, I felt myself approaching
nearer to waking consciousness but wanted to remain in the twilight state.
‘Scene: I was stepping across a brook with one foot but drew it back again
at once with the intention of remaining on this side.’ (Silberer, 1911, 625.)
‘Example No. 6—Conditions as in example No. 4’ (in which he had
wanted to lie in bed a little longer, though without oversleeping). ‘Iwanted to give way to sleep for a little longer.
‘Scene: I was saying good-bye to someone and was arranging with him (or
her)to meet him (or her) again soon.’ (Ibid., 627.)
The ‘functional’ phenomenon, ‘the representation of a state instead of
an object,’ was observed by Silberer principally in the two conditions offalling asleep and waking up. It is obvious that dream-interpretation isonly concerned with the latter case. Silberer has given examples whichshow convincingly that in many dreams the last pieces of the manifestcontent, which are immediately followed by waking, represent nothingmore nor less than an intention to wake or the process of waking. Therepresentation may be in terms of such images as crossing a threshold(‘threshold symbolism’), leaving one room and entering another, depar-ture, home-coming, parting with a companion, diving into water, etc. Icannot, however, refrain from remarking that I have come across dream-elements which can be related to threshold symbolism, whether in myown dreams or in those of subjects whom I have analysed, far less fre-quently than Silberer’s communications would have led one to expect.
It is by no means inconceivable or improbable that this threshold sym-
bolism might throw light upon some elements in the middle of the tex-ture of dreams—in places, for instance, where there is a question ofoscillations in the depth of sleep and of an inclination to break off thedream. Convincing instances of this, however, have not been produced.
1
What seem to occur more frequently are cases of overdetermination, inwhich a part of a dream which has derived its material content from thenexus of dream-thoughts is employed to represent in addition some state
of mental activity.
This very interesting functional phenomenon of Silberer’s has, through
no fault of its discoverer’s, led to many abuses; for it has been regarded aslending support to the old inclination to give abstract and symbolic inter-pretations to dreams. The preference for the ‘functional category’ is carriedso far by some people that they speak of the functional phenomenon508 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [See, however, a subsequent remark by Freud on p. 559 below.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 508wherever intellectual activities or emotional processes occur in the dream-
thoughts, although such material has neither more nor less right than anyother kind to ﬁnd its way into a dream as residues of the previous day. [Cf.pp. 236 n. 3, and 421 n .]
We are ready to recognize the fact that Silberer’s phenomena constitute
a second contribution on the part of waking thought to the constructionof dreams; though it is less regularly present and less signiﬁcant than theﬁrst one, which has already been introduced under the name of ‘secondaryrevision.’ It has been shown that a part of the attention which operatesduring the day continues to be directed towards dreams during the stateof sleep, that it keeps a check on them and criticizes them and reserves thepower to interrupt them. It has seemed plausible to recognize in the men-tal agency which thus remains awake the censor
1to whom we have had to
attribute such a powerful restricting inﬂuence upon the form taken bydreams. What Silberer’s observations have added to this is the fact that incertain circumstances a species of self-observation plays a part in this andmakes a contribution to the content of the dream. The probable relationsof this self-observing agency, which may be particularly prominent inphilosophical minds, to endopsychic perception, to delusions of observa-tion, to conscience and to the censor of dreams can be more appropriatelytreated elsewhere.
2
I will now try to sum up this lengthy disquisition on the dream-work.
We were faced by the question whether the mind employs the whole of itsfaculties without reserve in constructing dreams or only a functionally re-stricted fragment of them. Our investigations led us to reject entirely theform in which the question was framed as being inadequate to the circum-stances. If, however, we had to reply to the question on the basis of theterms in which it was stated, we should be obliged to reply in the afﬁrma-tive to both the alternatives, mutually exclusive though they appear to be.
T wo separate functions may be distinguished in mental activity during the509 I. Secondary Revision
1 [Freud almost always uses the German word ‘Zensur’ (‘censor ship’); but here and
a few lines lower down he uses the personal form ‘Zensor’ (‘censor’). Other in-
stances of this very rare occur rence will be found in Section III of the paper on
‘Narcissism’ (Freud, 1914 c) and in Lecture XXIX of the New Introductory Lec-
tures (Freud, 1933a).]
2 [Footnote added 1914:] ‘On Narcissism’ (Freud, 1914c [Section III]).—The next
paragraph appeared in the ﬁrst edition.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 509construction of a dream: the production of the dream-thoughts, and their
transformation into the content of the dream. The dream-thoughts are en-tirely rational and are constructed with an expenditure of all the psychicalenergy of which we are capable. They have their place among thought- processes that have not become conscious—processes from which, aftersome modiﬁcation, our conscious thoughts, too, arise. However many in-teresting and puzzling questions the dream-thoughts may involve, suchquestions have, after all, no special relation to dreams and do not call fortreatment among the problems of dreams.
1On the other hand, the second
function of mental activity during dream-construction, the transformationof the unconscious thoughts into the content of the dream, is peculiar todream-life and characteristic of it. This dream-work proper diverges furtherfrom our picture of waking thought than has been supposed even by themost determined depredator of psychical functioning during the formationof dreams. The dream-work is not simply more careless, more irrational,more forgetful and more incomplete than waking thought; it is completelydifferent from it qualitatively and for that reason not immediately compa-rable with it. It does not think, calculate or judge in any way at all; it re-stricts itself to giving things a new form. It is exhaustively described by anenumeration of the conditions which it has to satisfy in producing its result. That product, the dream, has above all to evade the censorship, and510 VI. The Dream-Work
1 [Footnote added 1925:] I used at one time to ﬁnd it extraordinarily difﬁcult to
accustom readers to the distinction between the manifest content of dreams and
the latent dream-thoughts. Again and again arguments and objections would bebrought up based upon some uninterpreted dream in the form in which it hadbeen retained in the memory, and the need to interpret it would be ignored. Butnow that analysts at least have become reconciled to replacing the manifestdream by the meaning revealed by its interpretation, many of them have becomeguilty of falling into another confusion which they cling to with equal obstinacy.They seek to ﬁnd the essence of dreams in their latent content and in so doingthey overlook the distinction between the latent dream-thoughts and the dream-work. At bottom, dreams are nothing other than a particular form of thinking,
made possible by the conditions of the state of sleep. It is the dream-work which
creates that form, and it alone is the essence of dreaming—the explanation of itspeculiar nature. I say this in order to make it possible to assess the value of thenotorious ‘prospective purpose’ of dreams. [See below, p. 577 n.] The fact thatdreams concern themselves with attempts at solving the prob lems by which ourmental life is faced is no more strange than that our conscious waking life shoulddo so; beyond this it merely tells us that that activity can also be carried on inthe preconscious—and this we already knew.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 510with that end in view the dream-work makes use of a displacement of psy-
chical intensities to the point of a transvaluation of all psychical values. The
thoughts have to be reproduced exclusively or predominantly in the mate-
rial of visual and acoustic memory-traces, and this necessity imposes uponthe dream-work considerations of representability which it meets by carrying
out fresh displacements. Greater intensities have probably to be producedthan are available in the dream-thoughts at night, and this purpose isserved by the extensive condensation which is carried out with the constit-
uents of the dream-thoughts. Little attention is paid to the logical relationsbetween the thoughts; those relations are ultimately given a disguised rep-resentation in certain formal characteristics of dreams. Any affect attached
to the dream-thoughts undergoes less modiﬁcation than their ideationalcontent. Such affects are as a rule suppressed; when they are retained, theyare detached from the ideas that properly belong to them, affects of a sim-ilar character being brought together. Only a single portion of the dream-work and one which operates to an irregular degree, the working over ofthe material by partly aroused waking thought, tallies to some extent withthe view which other writers have sought to apply to the entire activity ofdream-construction.
1511 I. Secondary Revision
1 [At this point there followed in the fourth, ﬁfth, sixth and seventh editions
(from 1914 to 1922) two self-contained essays by Otto Rank, bearing the titles
‘Dreams and Creative Writing’ and ‘Dreams and Myths.’ These were omittedfrom the Gesammelte Schriften, 1924, with a comment by Freud ( 3,150) that
they were ‘naturally not included in a collected edition of my works.’ They were,how ever, not re-inserted in the subsequent (eighth) edition of 1930. See the Ed-itor’s Introduction, p. xxi.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 5119780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 512CHAPTER VII
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM-PROCESSES1
Among the dreams which have been reported to me by other people,
there is one which has special claims upon our attention at this point. It
was told to me by a woman patient who had herself heard it in a lectureon dreams: its actual source is still unknown to me. Its content made animpression on the lady, however, and she proceeded to ‘re-dream’ it, thatis, to repeat some of its elements in a dream of her own, so that, by takingit over in this way, she might express her agreement with it on one partic-ular point.
The preliminaries to this model dream were as follows. A father had
been watching beside his child’s sick-bed for days and nights on end. Afterthe child had died, he went into the next room to lie down, but left thedoor open so that he could see from his bedroom into the room in whichhis child’s body was laid out, with tall candles standing round it. An oldman had been engaged to keep watch over it, and sat beside the body mur-muring prayers. After a few hours’ sleep, the father had a dream that his
child was standing beside his bed, caught him by the arm and whispered tohim reproachfully: ‘Father, don’t you see I’m burning?’ He woke up, noticed
a bright glare of light from the next room, hurried into it and found thatthe old watchman had dropped off to sleep and that the wrappings and
5131 [Some light has been thrown on the difﬁculties presented in the later sections of
this chapter by Freud’s early correspondence with Wilhelm Fliess (Freud,
1950a). Cf. the Editor’s Introduction (p. xv ff.).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 513one of the arms of his beloved child’s dead body had been burned by a
lighted candle that had fallen on them.
The explanation of this moving dream is simple enough and, so my
patient told me, was correctly given by the lecturer. The glare of lightshone through the open door into the sleeping man’s eyes and led him tothe conclusion which he would have arrived at if he had been awake,namely that a candle had fallen over and set something alight in theneighbourhood of the body. It is even possible that he had felt some con-cern when he went to sleep as to whether the old man might not be in-competent to carry out his task.
Nor have I any changes to suggest in this interpretation except to add
that the content of the dream must have been overdetermined and thatthe words spoken by the child must have been made up of words whichhe had actually spoken in his lifetime and which were connected with im-portant events in the father’s mind. For instance, ‘I’m burning’ may have
been spoken during the fever of the child’s last illness, and ‘Father, don’t
you see?’ may have been derived from some other highly emotional situa-tion of which we are in ignorance.
But, having recognized that the dream was a process with a meaning,
and that it can be inserted into the chain of the dreamer’s psychical expe-riences, we may still wonder why it was that a dream occurred at all insuch circumstances, when the most rapid possible awakening was calledfor. And here we shall observe that this dream, too, contained the fulﬁl-ment of a wish. The dead child behaved in the dream like a living one: hehimself warned his father, came to his bed, and caught him by the arm,just as he had probably done on the occasion from the memory of whichthe ﬁrst part of the child’s words in the dream were derived. For the sakeof the fulﬁlment of this wish the father prolonged his sleep by one mo-ment. The dream was preferred to a waking reﬂection because it was ableto show the child as once more alive. If the father had woken up ﬁrst andthen made the inference that led him to go into the next room, he would,as it were, have shortened his child’s life by that moment of time.
There can be no doubt what the peculiar feature is which attracts our in-
terest to this brief dream. Hitherto we have been principally concerned withthe secret meaning of dreams and the method of discovering it and with themeans employed by the dream-work for concealing it. The problems ofdream-interpretation have hitherto occupied the centre of the picture. Andnow we come upon a dream which raises no problem of interpretation and514 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 514the meaning of which is obvious, but which, as we see, nevertheless retains
the essential characteristics that differentiate dreams so strikingly from wak-ing life and consequently call for explanation. It is only after we have dis-posed of everything that has to do with the work of interpretation that wecan begin to realize the incompleteness of our psychology of dreams.
But before starting off along this new path, it will be well to pause and
look around, to see whether in the course of our journey up to this pointwe have overlooked anything of importance. For it must be clearly under-stood that the easy and agreeable portion of our journey lies behind us.Hitherto, unless I am greatly mistaken, all the paths along which we havetravelled have led us towards the light—towards elucidation and fullerunderstanding. But as soon as we endeavour to penetrate more deeplyinto the mental process involved in dreaming, every path will end indarkness. There is no possibility of explaining dreams as a psychical pro-
cess, since to explain a thing means to trace it back to something alreadyknown, and there is at the present time no established psychologicalknowledge under which we could subsume what the psychological exam-ination of dreams enables us to infer as a basis for their explanation. Onthe contrary, we shall be obliged to set up a number of fresh hypotheseswhich touch tentatively upon the structure of the apparatus of the mindand upon the play of forces operating in it. We must be careful, however,not to pursue these hypotheses too far beyond their ﬁrst logical links, ortheir value will be lost in uncertainties. Even if we make no false infer-ences and take all the logical possibilities into account, the probable in-completeness of our premises threatens to bring our calculation to acomplete miscarriage. No conclusions upon the construction and work-ing methods of the mental instrument can be arrived at or at least fullyproved from even the most painstaki ng investigation of dreams or of any
other mental function taken in isolation. To achieve this result, it will be
necessary to correlate all the established implications derived from a com-parative study of a whole series of such functions. Thus the psychologicalhypotheses to which we are led by an analysis of the processes of dream-ing must be left, as it were, in suspense, until they can be related to theﬁndings of other enquiries which seek to approach the kernel of the sameproblem from another angle.515 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 515(A)
THE FORGETTING OF DREAMS
I suggest, therefore, that we should ﬁrst turn to a topic that raises a dif-
ﬁculty which we have not hitherto considered but which is nevertheless
capable of cutting the ground from under all our efforts at interpretingdreams. It has been objected on more than one occasion that we have infact no knowledge of the dreams that we set out to interpret, or, speakingmore correctly, that we have no guarantee that we know them as they ac-tually occurred. (See pp. 76 f.)
In the ﬁrst place, what we remember of a dream and what we exercise
our interpretative arts upon has been mutilated by the untrustworthinessof our memory, which seems quite especially incapable of retaining adream and may well have lost precisely the most important parts of itscontent. It quite frequently happens that when we seek to turn our atten-tion to one of our dreams we ﬁnd ourselves regretting the fact that, thoughwe dreamt far more, we can remember nothing but a single fragmentwhich is itself recollected with peculiar uncertainty.
Secondly, there is every reason to suspect that our memory of dreams
is not only fragmentary but positively inaccurate and falsiﬁed. On the onehand it may be doubted whether what we dreamt was really as discon-nected and hazy as our recollection of it; and on the other hand it may alsobe doubted whether a dream was really as connected as it is in the accountwe give of it, whether in attempting to reproduce it we do not ﬁll in whatwas never there, or what has been forgotten, with new and arbitrarily se-lected material, whether we do not add embellishments and trimmingsand round it off so that there is no possibility of deciding what its originalcontent may have been. Indeed one author, Spitta (1882, [338]),
1goes to
the point of suggesting that in so far as a dream shows any kind of orderor coherence, these qualities are only introduced into it when we try to re-call it to mind. [Cf. p. 77.] Thus there seems to be a danger that the very516 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Added in text in 1914 and transferred to footnote in 1930:] So too Foucault
[1906, 141 f.] and Tannery [1898].9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 516thing whose value we have undertaken to assess may slip completely
through our ﬁngers.
Hitherto in interpreting dreams we have disregarded such warnings. On
the contrary, we have accepted it as being just as important to interpret thesmallest, least conspicuous and most uncertain constituents of the contentof dreams as those that are most clearly and certainly preserved. The dreamof Irma’s injection contained the phrase ‘I at once called in Dr. M.’ [p. 136];
and we assumed that even this detail would not have found its way into thedream unless it had had some particular origin. It was thus that we cameupon the story of the unfortunate patient to whose bedside I had ‘at once’called in my senior colleague. In the apparently absurd dream which treatedthe difference between 51 and 56 as a negligible quantity, the number 51was mentioned several times. [See p. 443.] Instead of regarding this as a mat-ter of course or as something indifferent, we inferred from it that there wasa second line of thought in the latent content of the dream leading to the
number 51; and along this track we arrived at my fears of 51 years being thelimit of my life, in glaring contrast to the dream’s dominant train of thoughtwhich was lavish in its boasts of a long life. In the ‘Non vixit dream [pp. 430
ff.] there was an inconspicuous interpolation which I overlooked at ﬁrst: ‘As
P . failed to understand him, Fl. asked me,’ etc. When the interpretation was
held up, I went back to these words and it was they that led me on to thechildhood phantasy which turned out to be an intermediate nodal point inthe dream-thoughts. [See pp. 488 f.] This was arrived at by way of the lines:
Selten habt ihr mich verstanden,
Selten auch verstand ich Euch,Nur wenn wir im Kot uns fanden,
So verstanden wir uns gleich.
1
Examples could be found in every analysis to show that precisely the most
trivial elements of a dream are indispensable to its interpretation and that thework in hand is held up if attention is not paid to these elements until toolate. We have attached no less importance in interpreting dreams to everyshade of the form of words in which they were laid before us. And evenwhen it happened that the text of the dream as we had it was  meaningless or517 A. The Forgetting of Dreams
1 [Literally: ‘Rarely have you understood me, and rarely too have I understood you.
Not until we both found ourselves in the mud did we promptly understand each
other.’ Heine, Buch der Lieder, ‘Die Heimkehr,’ LXXVIII.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 517inadequate—as though the effort to give a correct  account of it had been
 unsuccessful—we have taken this defect into account as well. In short, wehave treated as Holy Writ what previous writers have regarded as an arbitraryimprovisation, hurriedly patched together in the embarrassment of the mo-ment. This contradiction stands in need of an explanation.
The explanation is in our favour, though without putting the other
writers in the wrong. In the light of our newly-won understanding of theorigin of dreams the contradiction disappears completely. It is true thatwe distort dreams in attempting to reproduce them; here we ﬁnd at workonce more the process which we have described as the secondary (and of-ten ill conceived) revision of the dream by the agency which carries outnormal thinking [pp. 493 ff.]. But this distortion is itself no more than apart of the revision to which the dream-thoughts are regularly subjectedas a result of the dream-censorship. The other writers have at this pointnoticed or suspected the part of dream-distortion which operates mani-festly; we are less interested, since we know that a much more far-reaching
process of distortion, though a less obvious one, has already developed thedream out of the hidden dream-thoughts. The only mistake made by pre-vious writers has been in supposing that the modiﬁcation of the dream inthe course of being remembered and put into words is an arbitrary one
and cannot be further resolved and that it is therefore calculated to giveus a misleading picture of the dream.
1They have underestimated the ex-
tent to which psychical events are determined. There is nothing arbitraryabout them. It can be shown quite generally that if an element is left un-determined by one train of thought, its determination is immediately ef-fected by a second one. For instance, I may try to think of a numberarbitrarily. But this is impossible: the number that occurs to me will beunambiguously and necessarily determined by thoughts of mine, thoughthey may be remote from my immediate intention.
2The modiﬁcations518 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [A misunderstanding in a contrary direction of the importance of the text of
dreams is discussed towards the end of Freud’s paper on the technical uses of
dream-interpretation in therapeutic analyses (1911 e).]
2 [Footnote added 1909:] See my Psychopathology of Everyday Life [1901b, Chapter
XII(A), Nos. 2 to 7.—No. 2 relates to a letter written by Freud to Fliess on Au-gust 27, 1899 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 116), while he was correcting the proofs of
the present volume, in which he prophesied that the book would contain 2,467misprints. (See below, p. 534 n. 2.)].9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 518to which dreams are submitted under the editorship of waking life are
just as little arbitrary. They are associatively linked to the material whichthey replace, and serve to show us the way to that material, which may inits turn be a substitute for something else.
In analysing the dreams of my patients I sometimes put this assertion
to the following test, which has never failed me. If the ﬁrst account givenme by a patient of a dream is too hard to follow I ask him to repeat it. Indoing so he rarely uses the same words. But the parts of the dream whichhe describes in different terms are by that fact revealed to me as the weakspot in the dream’s disguise: they serve my purpose just as Hagen’s wasserved by the embroidered mark on Siegfried’s cloak.
1That is the point
at which the interpretation of the dream can be started. My request to thepatient to repeat his account of the dream has warned him that I was pro-posing to take special pains in solving it; under pressure of the resistance,therefore, he hastily covers the weak spots in the dream’s disguise by re-placing any expressions that threaten to betray its meaning by other lessrevealing ones. In this way he draws my attention to the expression whichhe has dropped out. The trouble taken by the dreamer in preventing thesolution of the dream gives me a basis for estimating the care with whichits cloak has been woven.
Previous writers have had less justiﬁcation in devoting so much space
to the doubt with which our judgement receives accounts of dreams. For
this doubt has no intellectual warrant. There is in general no guarantee ofthe correctness of our memory; and yet we yield to the compulsion to at-tach belief to its data far more often than is objectively justiﬁed. Doubtwhether a dream or certain of its details have been correctly reported isonce more a derivative of the dream-censorship, of resistance to the pene-tration of the dream-thoughts into consciousness.
2This resistance has not
been exhausted even by the displacements and substitutions it has broughtabout; it persists in the form of doubt attaching to the material which hasbeen allowed through. We are especially inclined to misunderstand this519 A. The Forgetting of Dreams
1 [There was only one spot on Siegfried’s body where he could be wounded. By a
trick, Hagen persuaded Kriemhild, who alone knew where the spot was, to em-
broider a small cross on Siegfried’s cloak at the vital point. It was there that Ha-gen later stabbed him. (Nibelungenlied, XV and XVL.)]
2 [For the same mechanism of doubt in cases of hysteria see a passage near the be-
ginning of Part I of the case history of ‘Dora’ (1905 e).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 519doubt since it is careful never to attack the more intense elements of a
dream but only the weak and indistinct ones. As we already know, how-ever, a complete reversal of all psychical values takes place between thedream-thoughts and the dream [p. 345]. Distortion is only made possibleby a withdrawal of psychical value; it habitually expresses itself by thatmeans and is occasionally content to require nothing more. If, then, an in-distinct element of a dream’s content is in addition attacked by doubt, wehave a sure indication that we are dealing with a comparatively direct de-rivative of one of the proscribed dream-thoughts. The state of things iswhat it was after some sweeping revolution in one of the republics of an-tiquity or the Renaissance. The noble and powerful families which hadpreviously dominated the scene were sent into exile and all the high ofﬁceswere ﬁlled by newcomers. Only the most impoverished and powerlessmembers of the vanquished families, or their remote dependents, were al-lowed to remain in the city; and even so they did not enjoy full civic rightsand were viewed with distrust. The distrust in this analogy corresponds tothe doubt in the case we are considering. That is why in analysing a dreamI insist that the whole scale of estimates of certainty shall be abandonedand that the faintest possibility that something of this or that sort mayhave occurred in the dream shall be treated as complete certainty. In trac-ing any element of a dream it will be found that unless this attitude isﬁrmly adopted the analysis will come to a standstill. If any doubt is thrownupon the value of the element in question, the psychical result in the pa-tient is that none of the involuntary ideas underlying that element comesinto his head. This result is not a self-evident one. It would not make non-sense if someone were to say: ‘I don’t know for certain whether such andsuch a thing came into the dream, but here is what occurs to me in con-nection with it.’ But in fact no one ever does say this; and it is precisely thefact that doubt produces this interrupting effect upon an analysis that re-veals it as a derivative and tool of psychical resistance. Psycho-analysis isjustly suspicious. One of its rules is that whatever interrupts the progress of
analytic work is a resistance.
1520 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Footnote added 1925:] The proposition laid down in these peremptory terms—
‘whatever interrupts the progress of analytic work is a resistance’—is easily open
to misunderstanding. It is of course only to be taken as a technical rule, as awarning to analysts. It cannot be disputed that in the course of an analysis vari-ous events may occur the responsibility for which cannot be laid upon the pa-tient’s intentions. His father may die without his having murdered him; or a war9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 520The forgetting of dreams, too, remains inexplicable unless the power of
the psychical censorship is taken into account. In a number of cases the
feeling of having dreamt a great deal during the night and of only havingretained a little of it may in fact have some other meaning, such as thatthe dream-work has been perceptibly proceeding all through the nightbut has only left a short dream behind. [Cf. pp. 297, 494, and 574 f.] Itis no doubt true that we forget dreams more and more as time passes afterwaking; we often forget them in spite of the most painstaking efforts torecall them. But I am of opinion that the extent of this forgetting is as arule overestimated; and there is a similar overestimation of the extent towhich the gaps in a dream limit our knowledge of it. It is often possibleby means of analysis to restore all that has been lost by the forgetting ofthe dream’s content; at least, in quite a number of cases one can recon-struct from a single remaining fragment not, it is true, the dream—whichis in any case a matter of no importance—but all the dream-thoughts.This demands a certain amount of attention and self-discipline in carry-ing out the analysis; that is all—but it shows that there was no lack of ahostile (i.e. resistant) purpose at work in the forgetting of the dream.
1521 A. The Forgetting of Dreams
may break out which brings the analysis to an end. But behind its obvious exag-
geration the proposition is asserting something both true and new. Even if theinterrupting event is a real one and independent of the patient, it often dependson him how great an interruption it causes; and resistance shows itself unmis-takably in the readiness with which he accepts an occurrence of this kind or theexaggerated use which he makes of it.
1 [Footnote added 1919:] I may quote the following dream from my Introductory
Lectures [Freud, 1916–17, Lecture VII] as an example of the meaning of doubt
and uncertainty in a dream and of its content being at the same time shrunkdown to a single element; in spite of this the dream was successfully analysed af-ter a short delay:
‘A sceptical woman patient had a longish dream in the course of which some
people told her about my book on jokes and praised it highly. Something camein then about a “channel,” perhaps it was another book that mentioned a channel,or something else about a channel . . . she didn’t know . . . it was all so indistinct.
‘No doubt you will be inclined to expect that the element “channel,” since it was
so indistinct, would be inaccessible to interpretation. You are right in suspecting adifﬁculty; but the difﬁculty did not arise from the indistinctness: both the difﬁcultyand the indistinctness arose from another cause. Nothing occurred to the dreamerin connection with “channel,” and Icould of course throw no light on it. A little
later—it was the next day, in point of fact—she told me that she had thought ofsomething that might have something to do with it. It was a joke, too—a joke she9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 521Convincing evidence of the fact that the forgetting of dreams is ten-
dentious and serves the purpose of resistance1is afforded when it is pos-
sible to observe in analyses a preliminary stage of forgetting. It not
infrequently happens that in the middle of the work of interpretation anomitted portion of the dream comes to light and is described as havingbeen forgotten till that moment. Now a part of a dream that has been res-cued from oblivion in this way is invariably the most important part; italways lies on the shortest road to the dream’s solution and has for thatreason been exposed to resistance more than any other part. Among thespecimen dreams scattered through this volume, there is one in which apart of its content was added like this as an after-thought.
2It is the travel
dream in which I revenged myself on two disagreeable fellow-travellersand which I had to leave almost uninterpreted on account of its gross in-decency. [See pp. 462 ff.] The omitted portion ran as follows: ‘I said [in
English], referring to one of Schiller’s works: “It is from . . .” but, noticing
the mistake, I corrected myself: “It is by . . .” “Yes,” the man commented to hissister, “he said that right.”’
3522 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
had heard. On the steamer between Dover and Calais a well-known author fell into
conversation with an Englishman. The latter had occasion to quote the phrase:“Du sublime au ridicule il n’y a qu’un pas. [It is only a step from the sublime tothe ridiculous.]” Yes, replied the author, “le Pas de Calais”—meaning that he
thought France sublime and England ridiculous. But the Pas de Calais is a chan-
nel—the English Channel. You will ask whether I think this had anything to dowith the dream. Certainly I think so; and it provides the solution of the puzzlingelement of the dream. Can you doubt that this joke was already present before thedream occurred, as the unconscious thought behind the element “channel”? Canyou suppose that it was introduced as a subsequent invention? The association be-trayed the scepticism which lay concealed behind the patient’s ostensible admira-tion; and her resistance against revealing this was no doubt the common cause bothof her delay in producing the association and of the indistinctness of the dream- element concerned. Consider the relation of the dream-element to its unconsciousbackground: it was, as it were, a fragment of that background, an allusion to it, butit was made quite incomprehensible by being isolated.’
1 On the purposes of forgetting in general see my short paper on the psychical mech-
anism of forgetting (Freud, 1898 b). [Added 1909:] Later included [with modiﬁca-
tions] as the ﬁrst chapter in my Psychopathology of Everyday Life (Freud, 1901 b).
2 [Another instance will be found on p. 178 n. Yet another occurs in the analysis
of Dora’s second dream (Freud, 1905e , Section III).]
3 [Footnote added 1914:] Corrections such as this in the usages of foreign lan-
guages are not infrequent in dreams but are more often attributed to other9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 522Self-corrections in dreams, which seem so marvellous to some writers,
need not occupy our attention. I will indicate instead the recollection
which served as the model for my verbal error in this dream. When I wasnineteen years old I visited England for the ﬁrst time and spent a wholeday on the shore of the Irish Sea. I naturally revelled in the opportunity ofcollecting the marine animals left behind by the tide and I was occupiedwith a starﬁsh—the words ‘Hollthurn’ and ‘holothurians [sea-slugs]’ oc-
curred at the beginning of the dream—when a charming little girl cameup to me and said: ‘Is it a starﬁsh? Is it alive?’ ‘Yes,’ I replied, ‘he is alive,’and at once, embarrassed at my mistake, repeated the sentence correctly.The dream replaced the verbal error which I then made by another intowhich a German is equally liable to fall. ‘Das Buch ist von Schiller’ should
be translated not with a ‘from’ but with a ‘by.’ After all that we have heardof the purposes of the dream-work and its reckless choice of methods forattaining them, we shall not be surprised to hear that it effected this re-placement because of the magniﬁcent piece of condensation that wasmade possible by the identity of sound of the English ‘from’ and the Ger-man adjective ‘fromm’ [‘pious’]. But how did my blameless memory of the
sea-shore come to be in the dream? It served as the most innocent possibleexample of my using a word indicating gender or sex in the wrong place—of my bringing in sex (the word ‘he’) where it did not belong. This, inci-dentally, was one of the keys to the solution of the dream. No one who hasheard, furthermore, the origin attributed to the title of Clerk-Maxwell’s‘Matter and Motion [mentioned in the dream, p. 463] will have any difﬁ-culty in ﬁlling in the gaps: Molière’s ‘Le Malade  Imaginaire’—‘La matièreest-elle laudable?’
1—A motion of the bowels.
Moreover I am in a position to offer an ocular demonstration of the fact
that the forgetting of dreams is to a great extent a product of resistance.One of my patients will tell me he has had a dream but has forgotten everytrace of it: it is therefore just as though it had never happened. We proceedwith our work. I come up against a resistance; I therefore explain somethingto the patient and help him by encouragement and pressure to come to523 A. The Forgetting of Dreams
people. Maury (1878, 143) once dreamt, at a time when he was learning En-
glish, that, in telling someone that he had visited him the day before, he usedthe words ‘I called for you yesterday.’ Whereupon the other answered correctly:‘You should have said “I called on you yesterday.”’
1 [‘Is the matter laudable?’—Old medical terminology for ‘Is the excretion
healthy?’—The next phrase is in English in the original.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 523terms with some disagreeable thought. Hardly have I succeeded in this than
he exclaims: ‘Now I remember what it was I dreamt.’ The same resistancewhich interfered with our work that day also made him forget the dream.By overcoming this resistance I have recalled the dream to his memory.
In just the same way, when a patient reaches some particular point in his
work, he may be able to remember a dream which he had dreamt three orfour or even more days before and which had hitherto remained forgotten.
1
Psycho-analytic experience2has provided us with yet another proof
that the forgetting of dreams depends far more upon resistance than uponthe fact, stressed by the authorities, that the waking and sleeping statesare alien to each other [p. 75]. It not infrequently happens to me, as wellas to other analysts and to patients under treatment, that, having beenwoken up, as one might say, by a dream, I immediately afterwards, andin full possession of my intellectual powers, set about interpreting it. Insuch cases I have often refused to rest till I have arrived at a complete un-derstanding of the dream; yet it has sometimes been my experience thatafter ﬁnally waking up in the morning I have entirely forgotten both myinterpretative activity and the content of the dream, though knowing thatI have had a dream and interpreted it.
3It happens far more often that the
dream draws the ﬁndings of my interpretative activity back with it intooblivion than that my intellectual activity succeeds in preserving thedream in my memory. Yet there is no such psychical gulf between my in-terpretative activity and my waking thoughts as the authorities supposeto account for the forgetting of dreams.
Morton Prince (1910 [141]) has objected to my explanation of the
forgetting of dreams on the ground that that forgetting is only a specialcase of the amnesia attaching to dissociated mental states, that it is im-possible to extend my explanation of this special amnesia to other typesand that my explanation is consequently devoid of value even for its im-mediate purpose. His readers are thus reminded that in the course of allhis descriptions of these dissociated states he has never attempted to dis-cover a dynamic explanation of such phenomena. If he had, he would in-524 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Ernest Jones has described [1912b ] an analogous case
which often occurs: while a dream is being analysed the patient may recollect a
second one which was dreamt during the same night but whose very existencehad not been suspected.
2 [This paragraph and the next were added in 1911.]
3 [Cf. Postscript to the ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’ (Freud, 1922 c).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 524evitably have found that repression (or, more precisely, the resistance cre-
ated by it) is the cause both of the dissociations and of the amnesia at-taching to their psychical content.
An observation which I have been able to make in the course of prepar-
ing this manuscript has shown me that dreams are no more forgotten thanother mental acts and can be compared, by no means to their disadvantage,with other mental functions in respect of their retention in the memory. Ihad kept records of a large number of my own dreams which for one reasonor another I had not been able to interpret completely at the time or had leftentirely uninterpreted. And now, between one and two years later, I have at-tempted to interpret some of them for the purpose of obtaining more mate-rial in illustration of my views. These attempts have been successful in everyinstance; indeed the interpretation may be said to have proceeded more eas-ily after this long interval than it did at the time when the dream was a recentexperience. A possible explanation of this is that in the meantime I haveovercome some of the internal resistances which previously obstructed me.When making these subsequent interpretations I have compared the dream-thoughts that I elicited at the time of the dream with the present, usually farmore copious, yield, and I have always found that the old ones are includedamong the new. My astonishment at this was quickly halted by the reﬂectionthat I had long been in the habit of getting my patients, who sometimes tellme dreams dating from earlier years, to interpret them—by the same proce-dure and with the same success—as though they had dreamt them the nightbefore. When I come to discuss anxiety-dreams I shall give two examples ofpostponed interpretations like these. [See pp. 581 ff.] I was led into makingmy ﬁrst experiment of this kind by the justiﬁable expectation that in this asin other respects dreams would behave like neurotic symptoms. When I treata psychoneurotic—a hysteric, let us say—by psycho-analysis, I am obligedto arrive at an explanation for the earliest and long since vanished symptomsof his illness no less than for the contemporary ones which brought him tome for treatment; and I actually ﬁnd the earlier problem easier to solve thanthe immediate one. As long ago as in 1895 I was able to give an explanationin Studies on Hysteria [Breuer and Freud, 1895, Case History V (Frau Cäcilie
M.)] of the ﬁrst hysterical attack which a woman of over forty had had inher ﬁfteenth year.
1525 A. The Forgetting of Dreams
1 [Added in the text in 1919 and transferred to a footnote in 1930:] Dreams
which occur in the earliest years of childhood and are retained in the memory
for dozens of years, often with complete sensory vividness, are almost always of9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 525And here I will mention a number of further, somewhat disconnected,
points on the subject of interpreting dreams, which may perhaps help to
give readers their bearings should they feel inclined to check my state-ments by subsequent work upon their own dreams.
No one should expect that an interpretation of his dreams will fall into
his lap like manna from the skies. Practice is needed even for perceivingendoptic phenomena or other sensations from which our attention is nor-mally withheld; and this is so even though there is no psychical motiveﬁghting against such perceptions. It is decidedly more difﬁcult to get holdof ‘involuntary ideas.’ Anyone who seeks to do so must familiarize himselfwith the expectations raised in the present volume and must, in accor-dance with the rules laid down in it, endeavour during the work to refrainfrom any criticism, any parti pris, and any emotional or intellectual bias.
He must bear in mind Claude Bernard’s
1advice to experimenters in a
physiological laboratory: ‘travailler comme une bête’—he must work, thatis, with as much persistence as an animal and with as much disregard ofthe result. If this advice is followed, the task will no longer be a hard one.
The interpretation of a dream cannot always be accomplished at a single
sitting. When we have followed a chain of associations, it not infrequentlyhappens that we feel our capacity exhausted; nothing more is to be learntfrom the dream that day. The wisest plan then is to break off and resumeour work another day: another part of the dream’s content may then attractour attention and give us access to another stratum of dream-thoughts.This procedure might be described as ‘fractional’ dream-interpretation.
It is only with the greatest difﬁculty that the beginner in the business of
interpreting dreams can be persuaded that his task is not at an end when hehas a complete interpretation in his hands—an interpretation which makessense, is coherent and throws light upon every element of the dream’s con-tent. For the same dream may perhaps have another interpretation as well,an ‘over-interpretation’, which has escaped him. It is, indeed, not easy toform any conception of the abundance of the unconscious trains of thought,all striving to ﬁnd expression, which are active in our minds. Nor is it easy526 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
great importance in enabling us to understand the history of the subject’s mental
development and of his neurosis. Analysis of such dreams protects the physicianfrom errors and uncertainties which may lead, among other things, to theoreticalconfusion. [The example of the ‘Wolf Man’s’ dream was no doubt especially inFreud’s mind (1918 b).]
1 [The French physiologist (1813–78).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 526to credit the skill shown by the dream-work in always hitting upon forms of
expression that can bear several meanings—like the Little Tailor in the fairystory who hit seven ﬂies at a blow. My readers will always be inclined to ac-cuse me of introducing an unnecessary amount of ingenuity into my inter-pretations; but actual experience would teach them better. [See p. 315 n.]
On the other hand,
1I cannot conﬁrm the opinion, ﬁrst stated by Sil-
berer [e.g. 1914, Part II, Section 5], that all dreams (or many dreams, orcertain classes of dreams) require two different interpretations, which areeven stated to bear a ﬁxed relation to each other. One of these interpreta-tions, which Silberer calls the ‘psycho-analytic’ one, is said to give thedream some meaning or other, usually of an infantile-sexual kind; the otherand more important interpretation, to which he gives the name of ‘ana-gogic,’ is said to reveal the more serious thoughts, often of profound im-port, which the dream-work has taken as its material. Silberer has not givenevidence in support of this opinion by reporting a series of dreams analysedin the two directions. And I must object that the alleged fact is non- existent. In spite of what he says, the majority of dreams require no ‘over- interpretation’ and, more particularly, are insusceptible to an anagogicinterpretation. As in the case of many other theories put forward in recentyears, it is impossible to overlook the fact that Silberer’s views are inﬂuencedto some extent by a purpose which seeks to disguise the fundamental cir-cumstances in which dreams are formed and to divert interest from theirinstinctual roots. In a certain number of cases I have been able to conﬁrmSilberer’s statements. Analysis showed that in such cases the dream-workfound itself faced with the problem of transforming into a dream a series ofhighly abstract thoughts from waking life which were incapable of beinggiven any direct representation. It endeavoured to solve the problem by get-ting hold of another group of intellectual material, somewhat loosely re-lated (often in a manner which might be described as ‘allegorical’) to theabstract thoughts, and at the same time capable of being represented withfewer difﬁculties. The abstract interpretation of a dream that has arisen in
this way is given by the dreamer without any difﬁculty; the correct interpre-
tation of the material that has been interpolated must be looked for by thetechnical methods which are now familiar to us.
2527 A. The Forgetting of Dreams
1 [This paragraph was added in 1919.]
2 [Freud also discussed this point in a long footnote in his paper ‘A Metapsycho-
logical Supplement to the Theory of Dreams’ (1917d ) and towards the end of
his ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (1922 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 527The question whether it is possible to interpret every dream must be an-
swered in the negative.1It must not be forgotten that in interpreting a
dream we are opposed by the psychical forces which were responsible for
its distortion. It is thus a question of relative strength whether our intel-lectual interest, our capacity for self-discipline, our psychological knowl-edge and our practice in interpreting dreams enable us to master ourinternal resistances. It is always possible to go some distance: far enough, at
all events, to convince ourselves that the dream is a structure with a mean-ing, and as a rule far enough to get a glimpse of what that meaning is.Quite often an immediately succeeding dream allows us to conﬁrm andcarry further the interpretation we have tentatively adopted for its prede-cessor. A whole series of dreams, continuing over a period of weeks ormonths, is often based upon common ground and must accordingly be in-terpreted in connection with one another. [Cf. pp. 215 and 375 f.] In thecase of two consecutive dreams it can often be observed that one takes asits central point something that is only on the periphery of the other andvice versa, so that their interpretations too are mutually complementary. Ihave already given instances which show that different dreams dreamt onthe same night are, as a quite general rule, to be treated in their interpreta-tion as a single whole. [See pp. 348 f.]
There is often a passage in even the most thoroughly interpreted dream
which has to be left obscure; this is because we become aware during thework of interpretation that at that point there is a tangle of dream-thoughtswhich cannot be unravelled and which moreover adds nothing to ourknowledge of the content of the dream. This is the dream’s navel, the spotwhere it reaches down into the unknown. [Cf. p. 135 n .] The dream-
thoughts to which we are led by interpretation cannot, from the nature ofthings, have any deﬁnite endings; they are bound to branch out in every di-rection into the intricate network of our world of thought. It is at somepoint where this meshwork is particularly close that the dream-wish growsup, like a mushroom out of its mycelium.
But we must return to the facts concerning the forgetting of dreams,
for we have failed to draw one important conclusion from them. We haveseen that waking life shows an unmistakable inclination to forget anydream that has been formed in the course of the night—whether as awhole directly after waking, or bit by bit in the course of the day; and we528 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [This question is considered at greater length in Freud, 1925 i, Section A.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 528have recognized that the agent chieﬂy responsible for this forgetting is the
mental resistance to the dream which has already done what it couldagainst it during the night. But if all this is so, the question arises how itcomes about that a dream can be formed at all in the face of this resis-tance. Let us take the most extreme case, in which waking life has got ridof a dream as though it had never occurred. A consideration of the inter-play of psychical forces in this case must lead us to infer that the dreamwould in fact not have occurred at all if the resistance had been as strongduring the night as during the day. We must conclude that during thenight the resistance loses some of its power, though we know it does notlose the whole of it, since we have shown the part it plays in the forma-tion of dreams as a distorting agent. But we are driven to suppose that itspower may be diminished at night and that this makes the formation ofdreams possible. This makes it easy to understand how, having regainedits full strength at the moment of waking, it at once proceeds to get ridof what it was obliged to permit while it was weak. Descriptive psychol-ogy tells us that the principal sine qua non for the formation of dreams is
that the mind shall be in a state of sleep; and we are now able to explainthis fact: the state of sleep makes the formation of dreams possible because itreduces the power of the endopsychic censorship.
It is no doubt tempting to regard this as the only possible inference
that can be drawn from the facts of the forgetting of dreams, and to makeit the basis for further conclusions as to the conditions of energy prevail-ing during sleeping and waking. For the moment, however, we will stopat this point. When we have entered a little more deeply into the psychol-ogy of dreams we shall ﬁnd that the factors making possible the forma-tion of dreams can be viewed in another way as well. It may be that theresistance against the dream-thoughts becoming conscious can be evadedwithout any reduction having taken place in its power. And it seems aplausible idea that both of the two factors favouring the formation of
dreams—the reduction and the evasion of the resistance—are simultane-ously made possible by the state of sleep. I will break off here, though Ishall pick up the argument again presently. [Cf. pp. 572 f.]
There is another set of objections to our method of interpreting dreams
with which we must now deal. Our procedure consists in abandoning allthose purposive ideas which normally govern our reﬂections, in focussingour attention on a single element of the dream and in then taking note ofwhatever involuntary thoughts may occur to us in connection with it. We529 A. The Forgetting of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 529then take the next portion of the dream and repeat the process with it. We
allow ourselves to be led on by our thoughts regardless of the direction in
which they carry us and drift on in this way from one thing to another.But we cherish a conﬁdent belief that in the end, without any active inter-vention on our part, we shall arrive at the dream-thoughts from which thedream originated.
Our critics argue against this along the following lines. There is noth-
ing wonderful in the fact that a single element of the dream should leadus somewhere; every idea can be associated with something. What is re-
markable is that such an aimless and arbitrary train of thought shouldhappen to bring us to the dream-thoughts. The probability is that we aredeceiving ourselves. We follow a chain of associations from one element,till, for one reason or another, it seems to break off. If we then take up asecond element, it is only to be expected that the originally unrestrictedcharacter of our associations will be narrowed. For we still have the earlierchain of thoughts in our memory, and for that reason, in analysing thesecond dream-idea, we are more likely to hit upon associations whichhave something in common with associations from the ﬁrst chain. Wethen delude ourselves into thinking that we have discovered a thoughtwhich is a connecting point between two elements of the dream. Since wegive ourselves complete liberty to connect thoughts as we please and sincein fact the only transitions from one idea to another which we exclude arethose which operate in normal thinking, we shall ﬁnd no difﬁculty in thelong run in concocting out of a number of ‘intermediate thoughts’ some-thing which we describe as the dream-thoughts and which—thoughwithout any guarantee, since we have no other knowledge of what thedream-thoughts are—we allege to be the psychical substitute for the
dream. But the whole thing is completely arbitrary; we are merely exploit-ing chance connections in a manner which gives an effect of ingenuity. Inthis way anyone who cares to take such useless pains can worry out anyinterpretation he pleases from any dream.
If we were in fact met by objections such as these, we might defend
ourselves by appealing to the impression made by our interpretations, tothe surprising connections with other elements of the dream which emergein the course of our pursuing a single one of its ideas, and to the improb-ability that anything which gives such an exhaustive account of the dreamcould have been arrived at except by following up psychical connectionswhich had already been laid down. We might also point out in our defencethat our procedure in interpreting dreams is identical with the procedure530 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 530by which we resolve hysterical symptoms; and there the correctness of our
method is warranted by the coincident emergence and disappearance ofthe symptoms, or, to use a simile, the assertions made in the text are borneout by the accompanying illustrations. But we have no reason for evadingthe problem of how it is possible to reach a pre- existing goal by followingthe drift of an arbitrary and purposeless chain of thoughts; since, thoughwe may not be able to solve the problem, we can completely cut theground from under it.
For it is demonstrably untrue that we are being carried along a purpose-
less stream of ideas when, in the process of interpreting a dream, we abandonreﬂection and allow involuntary ideas to emerge. It can be shown that allthat we can ever get rid of are purposive ideas that are known to us; as soon
as we have done this, unknown —or, as we inaccurately say, ‘unconscious’—
purposive ideas take charge and thereafter determine the course of the invol-untary ideas. No inﬂuence that we can bring to bear upon our mentalprocesses can ever enable us to think without purposive ideas; nor am Iaware of any states of psychical confusion which can do so.
1Psychiatrists
have been far too ready in this respect to abandon their belief in the connect-edness of psychical processes. I know for a fact that trains of thought without531 A. The Forgetting of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] It was not until later that my attention was drawn to the
fact that Eduard von Hartmann takes the same view on this important matter
of psychology: ‘In discussing the part played by the unconscious in artistic cre-ation, Eduard von Hartmann (1890, 1,Section B,Chapter V) made a clear
statement of the law in accordance with which the association of ideas is gov-erned by unconscious purposive ideas, though he was unaware of the scope ofthe law. He set out to prove that “every combination of sensuous presentations,when it is not left purely to chance, but is led to a deﬁnite end, requires the helpof the Unconscious” [ibid., 1, 245; English translation, 1884, 1,283], and that
the part played by conscious interest is to stimulate the unconscious to select themost appropriate idea among the countless possible ones. It is the unconsciouswhich makes the appropriate selection of a purpose for the interest and this“holds good of the association of ideas in abstract thinking as well as in sensuousimagining and artistic combination” and in the production of jokes [ibid., 1,
247; English translation, 1, 285 f.]. For this reason a limitation of the association
of ideas to an exciting idea and an excited idea (in the sense of a pure associationpsychology) cannot be upheld. Such a limitation could be justiﬁed “only if thereare conditions in human life in which man is free not only from every consciouspurpose, but also from the sway or co-operation of every unconscious interest,every passing mood. This is, however, a condition hardly ever occurring, foreven if one in appearance completely abandons his train of thought to accident,9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 531purposive ideas no more occur in hysteria and paranoia than they do in the
formation or resolution of dreams. It may be that they do not occur in anyof the endogenous psychical disorders. Even the deliria of confusional statesmay have a meaning, if we are to accept Leuret’s brilliant suggestion [1834,131] that they are only unintelligible to us owing to the gaps in them. I my-self have formed the same opinion when I have had the opportunity of ob-serving them. Deliria are the work of a censorship which no longer takesthe trouble to conceal its operation; instead of collaborating in producinga new version that shall be unobjectionable, it ruthlessly deletes whateverit disapproves of, so that what remains becomes quite disconnected. Thiscensorship acts exactly like the censorship of newspapers at the Russianfrontier, which allows foreign journals to fall into the hands of the readerswhom it is its business to protect only after a quantity of passages have beenblacked out.
It may be that free play of ideas with a fortuitous chain of associations
is to be found in destructive organic cerebral processes; what is regardedas such in the psychoneuroses can always be explained as an effect of thecensorship’s inﬂuence upon a train of thought which has been pushedinto the foreground by purposive ideas that have remained hidden.
1It has
been regarded as an unfailing sign of an association being uninﬂuencedby purposive ideas if the associations (or images) in question seem to beinterrelated, in what is described as a ‘superﬁcial’ manner—by assonance,verbal ambiguity, temporal coincidence without connection in meaning,532 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
or if one abandons oneself entirely to the involuntary dreams of fancy, yet always
other leading interests, dominant feelings and moods prevail at one time ratherthan at another, and these will always exert an inﬂuence on the association ofideas.” [Ibid., 1,246; English translation, 1, 284.] “In semi-conscious dreams
always only such ideas as correspond to the main [unconscious] interest of themoment occur.” [Loc. cit.] The emphasis thus laid upon the inﬂuence of feelingsand moods on the free sequence of thoughts makes it possible to justify themethodological procedure of psycho-analysis completely from the standpoint ofHartmann’s psychology.’ (Pohorilles, 1913.)—Du Prel (1885, 107) refers to thefact that after we have vainly tried to recall a name, it often comes into our headsagain suddenly and without any warning. He concludes from this that uncon-scious but none the less purposeful thinking has taken place and that its resulthas suddenly entered consciousness.
1 [Footnote added 1909:] This assertion has received striking conﬁrmation from
C. G. Jung’s analyses in cases of dementia praecox. (Jung, 1907.)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 532or by any association of the kind that we allow in jokes or in play upon
words. This characteristic is present in the chains of thought which leadfrom the elements of a dream to the intermediate thoughts and fromthese to the dream-thoughts proper; we have seen instances of this—notwithout astonishment—in many dream analyses. No connection was tooloose, no joke too bad, to serve as a bridge from one thought to another.But the true explanation of this easy-going state of things is soon found.Whenever one psychical element is linked with another by an objectionable orsuperﬁcial association, there is also a legitimate and deeper link between themwhich is subjected to the resistance of the censorship.
1
The real reason for the prevalence of superﬁcial associations is not the
abandonment of purposive ideas but the pressure of the censorship. Super-ﬁcial associations replace deep ones if the censorship makes the normalconnecting paths impassable. We may picture, by way of analogy, a moun-tain region, where some general interruption of trafﬁc (owing to ﬂoods,for instance) has blocked the main, major roads, but where communica-tions are still maintained over inconvenient and steep footpaths normallyused only by the hunter.
T wo cases may here be distinguished, though in essence they are the
same. In the ﬁrst of these, the censorship is directed only against the con-
nection between two thoughts, which are unobjectionable separately. If so,
the two thoughts will enter consciousness in succession; the connection be-tween them will remain concealed, but, instead, a superﬁcial link betweenthem will occur to us, of which we should otherwise never have thought.This link is usually attached to some part of the complex of ideas quiteother than that on which the suppressed and essential connection is based.The second case is where the two thoughts are in themselves subject to cen-sorship on account of their content. If so, neither of them appears in its trueshape but only in a modiﬁed one which replaces it; and the two replacingthoughts are chosen in such a way that they have a superﬁcial associationthat repeats the essential connection which relates the two thoughts thathave been replaced. In both these cases the pressure of the censorship has resultedin a displacement from a normal and serious association to a superﬁcial and ap-parently absurd one.533 A. The Forgetting of Dreams
1 [Everywhere else in this work Freud speaks of ‘the censorship of the resistance.’ A
later clariﬁcation of the relation between the concepts of ‘resistance’ and ‘censor-
ship’ will be found in Lecture XXIX of the New Introductory Lectures (1933a ).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 533Since we are aware that displacements of this kind occur, we have no
hesitation when we are interpreting dreams in relying upon superﬁcial as-
sociations as much as upon others.1
In the psycho-analysis of neuroses the fullest use is made of these two
theorems—that, when conscious purposive ideas are abandoned, concealedpurposive ideas assume control of the current of ideas, and that superﬁcialassociations are only substitutes by displacement for suppressed deeper ones.Indeed, these theorems have become basic pillars of psycho-analytic tech-nique. When I instruct a patient to abandon reﬂection of any kind and totell me whatever comes into his head, I am relying ﬁrmly on the presump-tion that he will not be able to abandon the purposive ideas inherent in thetreatment and I feel justiﬁed in inferring that what seem to be the most in-nocent and arbitrary things which he tells me are in fact related to his illness.There is another purposive idea of which the patient has no  suspicion—onerelating to myself. The full estimate of the importance of these two theo-rems, as well as more detailed information about them, fall within the prov-ince of an account of the technique of psycho-analysis. Here, then, we havereached one of the frontier posts at which, in accordance with our pro-gramme, we must drop the subject of dream-interpretation.
2
There is one true conclusion that we may glean from these objections,
namely that we need not suppose that every association that occurs dur-534 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 The same considerations apply equally, of course, to cases in which the superﬁ-
cial associations appear openly in the content of the dream, as, for instance, in
the two dreams of Maury’s quoted above on pp. 87–8. ( Pélerinage—Pelletier—
pelle; kilomètre —kilogramme —Gilolo —Lobelia —Lopez— lotto.) My work with
neurotic patients has taught me the nature of the memories of which this is afavourite method of representation. They are occasions on which the subject hasturned over the pages of encyclopaedias or dictionaries in order (like most peopleat the inquisitive age of puberty) to satisfy their craving for an answer to the rid-dle of sex.—[An example of this will be found in the analysis of ‘Dora’s’ seconddream (Freud, 1905 e, Section III).]
2 [Footnote added 1909:] These two theorems, which sounded most unplausible at
the time they were made, have since been experimentally employed and con-ﬁrmed by Jung and his pupils in their studies in word-association. [Jung, 1906.—A most interesting argument on the allied topic of the validity of chains ofassociation starting from numbers selected ‘by chance’ (see above, pp. 518 f.) isdeveloped by Freud in the long footnote added in 1920 to Chapter XII (A, No.7) of The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b ).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 534ing the work of interpretation had a place in the dream-work during the
night. [Cf. pp. 298 and 327] It is true that in carrying out the interpreta-tion in the waking state we follow a path which leads back from the elements of the dream to the dream-thoughts and that the dream-workfollowed one in the contrary direction. But it is highly improbable thatthese paths are passable both ways. It appears, rather, that in the daytimewe drive shafts which follow along fresh chains of thought and that theseshafts make contact with the intermediate thoughts and the dream-thoughts now at one point and now at another. We can see how in thismanner fresh daytime material inserts itself into the interpretative chains.It is probable, too, that the increase in resistance that has set in since thenight makes new and more devious detours necessary. The number andnature of the collaterals [see p. 298 n. 1] that we spin in this way during
the day is of no psychological importance whatever, so long as they leadus to the dream-thoughts of which we are in search.
(B)
REGRESSION
Having now repelled the objections that have been raised against us,
or having at least indicated where our defensive weapons lie, we must nolonger postpone the task of setting about the psychological investigationsfor which we have so long been arming ourselves. Let us summarize theprincipal ﬁndings of our enquiry so far as it has gone. Dreams are psychi-cal acts of as much signiﬁcance as any others; their motive force is in everyinstance a wish seeking fulﬁlment; the fact of their not being recognizableas wishes and their many peculiarities and absurdities are due to the in-ﬂuence of the psychical censorship to which they have been subjectedduring the process of their formation: apart from the necessity of evadingthis censorship, other factors which have contributed to their formationare a necessity for the condensation of their psychical material, a regardfor the possibility of its being represented in sensory images and—thoughnot invariably—a demand that the structure of the dream shall have a ra-tional and intelligible exterior. Each of these propositions opens a way tofresh psychological postulates and speculations; the mutual relation be-tween the wish which is the dream’s motive force and the four conditions535 B. Regression9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 535to which the dream’s formation is subject, as well as the inter-relations
between the latter, require to be investigated; and the place of dreams inthe nexus of mental life has to be assigned.
It was with a view to reminding us of the problems which have still to
be solved that I opened the present chapter with an account of a dream.There was no difﬁculty in interpreting that dream—the dream of theburning child—even though its interpretation was not given fully in oursense. I raised the question of why the dreamer dreamt it at all instead ofwaking up, and recognized that one of his motives was a wish to representhis child as still alive. Our further discussions will show us that yet an-other wish also played a part. [See below, p. 570.] Thus it was in the ﬁrstinstance for the sake of fulﬁlling a wish that the process of thought duringsleep was transformed into a dream.
If we eliminate the wish-fulﬁlment, we shall see that only one feature
is left to distinguish the two forms of psychical event. The dream-thoughtwould have run: ‘I see a glare coming from the room where the dead bodyis lying. Perhaps a candle has fallen over and my child may be burning.’The dream repeated these reﬂections unaltered, but it represented themin a situation which was actually present and which could be perceivedthrough the senses like a waking experience. Here we have the most gen-eral and the most striking psychological characteristic of the process ofdreaming: a thought, and as a rule a thought of something that is wished,is objectiﬁed in the dream, is represented as a scene, or, as it seems to us,is experienced.
How, then, are we to explain this characteristic peculiarity of the
dream-work, or, to put the question more modestly, how are we to ﬁnd aplace for it in the nexus of psychical processes?
If we look into the matter more closely we shall observe that two almost
independent features stand out as characteristic of the form taken by thisdream. One is the fact that the thought is represented as an immediate sit-uation with the ‘perhaps’ omitted, and the other is the fact that thethought is transformed into visual images and speech.
In this particular dream the change made in the thoughts by the conver-
sion of the expectation expressed by them into the present tense may notseem particularly striking. This is because of what can only be described asthe unusually subordinate part played in this dream by wish- fulﬁlment.Consider instead another one, in which the dream-wish was not detachedfrom the waking thoughts that were carried over into sleep—for instance,536 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 536the dream of Irma’s injection [pp. 131 ff.]. There the dream-thought that
was represented was in the optative: ‘If only Otto were responsible for Irma’sillness!’ The dream repressed the optative and replaced it by a straightfor-ward present: ‘Yes, Otto is responsible for Irma’s illness.’ This, then, is theﬁrst of the transformations which is brought about in the dream-thoughtseven by a distortionless dream. We need not linger long over this ﬁrst pecu-liarity of dreams. We can deal with it by drawing attention to consciousphantasies—to day-dreams—which treat their ideational content in just thesame manner. While Daudet’s Monsieur Joyeuse
1was wandering, out of
work, through the streets of Paris (though his daughters believed that he hada job and was sitting in an ofﬁce), he was dreaming of developments thatmight bring him inﬂuential help and lead to his ﬁnding employment—andhe was dreaming in the present tense. Thus dreams make use of the presenttense in the same manner and by the same right as day-dreams. The presenttense is the one in which wishes are represented as fulﬁlled.
But dreams differ from day-dreams in their second characteristic:
namely, in the fact of their ideational content being transformed fromthoughts into sensory images, to which belief is attached and which appearto be experienced. I must add at once that not every dream exhibits thistransformation from idea into sensory image. There are dreams which con-sist only of thoughts but which cannot on that account be denied the es-sential nature of dreams. My ‘Autodidasker’ dream [pp. 315 ff.] was of thatkind; it included scarcely more sensory elements than if I had thought itscontent in the daytime. And in every dream of any considerable lengththere are elements which have not, like the rest, been given a sensory form,but which are simply thought or known, in the kind of way in which weare accustomed to think or know things in waking life. It should also be re-membered here that it is not only in dreams that such transformations ofideas into sensory images occur: they are also found in hallucinations andvisions, which may appear as independent entities, so to say, in health oras symptoms in the psychoneuroses. In short, the relation which we are ex-amining now is not in any respect an exclusive one. Nevertheless it remainstrue that this characteristic of dreams, when it is present, strikes us as beingtheir most notable one; so that it would be impossible for us to imagine the537 B. Regression
1 [In Le Nabab (cf. p. 496). A slip made by Freud over this name in his ﬁrst draft of
this sentence is discussed by him in his Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b ),
Chapter VII, towards the end of Section A.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 537dream-world without it. But in order to arrive at an understanding of it we
must embark upon a discussion that will take us far aﬁeld.
As the starting point for our enquiry, I should like to pick out one
from among many remarks made upon the theory of dreaming by thosewho have written on the subject. In the course of a short discussion onthe topic of dreams, the great Fechner (1889, 2, 520–1) puts forward the
idea that the scene of action of dreams is different from that of wakingideational life. [Cf. above, p. 78.] This is the only hypothesis that makes
the special peculiarities of dream-life intelligible.
1
What is presented to us in these words is the idea of psychical locality. I
shall entirely disregard the fact that the mental apparatus with which weare here concerned is also known to us in the form of an anatomical prepa-ration, and I shall carefully avoid the temptation to determine psychicallocality in any anatomical fashion. I shall remain upon psychologicalground, and I propose simply to follow the suggestion that we should pic-ture the instrument which carries out our mental functions as resemblinga compound microscope or a photographic apparatus, or something of thekind. On that basis, psychical locality will correspond to a point inside theapparatus at which one of the preliminary stages of an image comes intobeing. In the microscope and telescope, as we know, these occur in part atideal points, regions in which no tangible component of the apparatus issituated. I see no necessity to apologize for the imperfections of this or ofany similar imagery. Analogies of this kind are only intended to assist usin our attempt to make the complications of mental functioning intelligi-ble by dissecting the function and assigning its different constituents todifferent component parts of the apparatus. So far as I know, the experi-ment has not hitherto been made of using this method of dissection in or-der to investigate the way in which the mental instrument is put together,and I can see no harm in it. We are justiﬁed, in my view, in giving free reinto our speculations so long as we retain the coolness of our judgement anddo not mistake the scaffolding for the building. And since at our ﬁrst ap-proach to something unknown all that we need is the assistance of provi-sional ideas, I shall give preference in the ﬁrst instance to hypotheses of thecrudest and most concrete description.538 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [In a letter to Fliess of February 9, 1898 (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 83), Freud writes
that this passage in Fechner is the only sensible remark he has found in the liter-
ature on dreams.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 538Accordingly, we will picture the mental apparatus as a compound instru-
ment, to the components of which we will give the name of ‘agencies,’1or
(for the sake of greater clarity) ‘systems.’ It is to be anticipated, in the next
place, that these systems may perhaps stand in a regular spatial relation toone another, in the same kind of way in which the various systems of lensesin a telescope are arranged behind one another. Strictly speaking, there isno need for the hypothesis that the psychical systems are actually arrangedin a spatial order. It would be sufﬁcient if a ﬁxed order were established by
the fact that in a given psychical process the excitation passes through thesystems in a particular temporal sequence. In other processes the sequence
may perhaps be a different one; that is a possibility that we shall leave open.For the sake of brevity we will in future speak of the components of the ap-paratus as ‘ψ-systems.’
The ﬁrst thing that strikes us is that this apparatus, compounded of
ψ-systems, has a sense or direction. All our psychical activity starts fromstimuli (whether internal or external) and ends in innervations.
2Accord-
ingly, we shall ascribe a sensory and a motor end to the apparatus. At thesensory end there lies a system which receives perceptions; at the motorend there lies another, which opens the gateway to motor activity. Psychi-cal processes advance in general from the perceptual end to the motorend. Thus the most general schematic picture of the psychical apparatusmay be represented thus (Fig. 1):539 B. Regression
1 [‘Instanzen, ’ literally ‘instances,’ in a sense similar to that in which the word oc-
curs in the phrase ‘a Court of First Instance.’]
2 [‘Innervation’ is a highly ambiguous term. It is very frequently used in a structural
sense, to mean the anatomical distribution of nerves in some organism or bodily
region. Freud uses it more often (though not invariably) to mean the transmissionof energy into a system of nerves, or (as in the present instance) speciﬁcally into anefferent system—to indicate, that is to say, a process tending towards discharge.]Pcpt M
Fig. 19780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 539This, however, does no more than fulﬁl a requirement with which we
have long been familiar, namely that the psychical apparatus must be con-
structed like a reﬂex apparatus. Reﬂex processes remain the model ofevery psychical function.
Next, we have grounds for introducing a ﬁrst differentiation at the sen-
sory end. A trace is left in our psychical apparatus of the perceptions whichimpinge upon it. This we may describe as a ‘memory-trace’; and to thefunction relating to it we give the name of ‘memory.’ If we are in earnestover our plan of attaching psychical processes to systems, memory-tracescan only consist in permanent modiﬁcations of the elements of the sys-tems. But, as has already been pointed out elsewhere,
1there are obvious
difﬁculties involved in supposing that one and the same system can accu-rately retain modiﬁcations of its elements and yet remain perpetually opento the reception of fresh occasions for modiﬁcation. In accordance, there-fore, with the principle which governs our experiment, we shall distributethese two functions on to different systems. We shall suppose that a systemin the very front of the apparatus receives the perceptual stimuli but retainsno trace of them and thus has no memory, while behind it there lies a sec-ond system which transforms the momentary excitations of the ﬁrst sys-tem into permanent traces. The schematic picture of our psychicalapparatus would then be as follows (Fig. 2):
It is a familiar fact that we retain permanently something more than
the mere content of the perceptions which impinge upon the system Pcpt.
Our perceptions are linked with one another in our memory—ﬁrst and540 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [By Breuer in a footnote to Section I of his theoretical contribution to Breuer
and Freud, 1895, where, among other things, he writes: ‘The mirror of a reﬂect-
ing telescope cannot at the same time be a photographic plate.’]Pcpt Mnem Mnem'Mnem” M
Fig. 29780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 540foremost according to simultaneity of occurrence. We speak of this fact
as ‘association.’ It is clear, then, that, if the Pcpt. system has no memory
whatever, it cannot retain any associative traces; the separate Pcpt. ele-
ments would be intolerably obstructed in performing their function if theremnant of an earlier connection were to exercise an inﬂuence upon afresh perception. We must therefore assume the basis of association lies inthe mnemic systems. Association would thus consist in the fact that, as aresult of a diminution in resistances and of the laying down of facilitatingpaths, an excitation is transmitted from a given Mnem. element more
readily to one Mnem. element than to another.
Closer consideration will show the necessity for supposing the exis-
tence not of one but of several such Mnem. elements, in which one and
the same excitation, transmitted by the Pcpt. elements, leaves a variety of
different permanent records. The ﬁrst of these Mnem. systems will natu-
rally contain the record of association in respect to simultaneity in time;
while the same perceptual material will be arranged in the later systemsin respect to other kinds of coincidence, so that one of these later systems,for instance, will record relations of similarity, and so on with the others.It would of course be a waste of time to try to put the psychical signiﬁ-cance of a system of this kind into words. Its character would lie in theintimate details of its relations to the different elements of the raw mate-rial of memory, that is—if we may hint at a theory of a more radicalkind—in the degrees of conductive resistance which it offered to the pas-sage of excitation from those elements.
At this point I will interpolate a remark of a general nature which may
perhaps have important implications. It is the Pcpt. system, which is with-
out the capacity to retain modiﬁcations and is thus without memory, thatprovides our consciousness with the whole multiplicity of sensory quali-ties. On the other hand, our memories—not excepting those which aremost deeply stamped on our minds—are in themselves unconscious.They can be made conscious; but there can be no doubt that they canproduce all their effects while in an unconscious condition. What we de-scribe as our ‘character’ is based on the memory-traces of our impressions;and, moreover, the impressions which have had the greatest effect onus—those of our earliest youth—are precisely the ones which scarcelyever become conscious. But if memories become conscious once more,they exhibit no sensory quality or a very slight one in comparison withperceptions. A most promising light would be thrown on the conditionsgoverning the excitation of neurones if it could be conﬁrmed that in the541 B. Regression9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 541ψ-systems memory and the quality that characterizes consciousness are mutu-
ally exclusive.1
The assumptions we have so far put forward as to the construction of
the psychical apparatus at its sensory end have been made without refer-ence to dreams or to the psychological information that we have been ableto infer from them. Evidence afforded by dreams will, however, help us to-wards understanding another portion of the apparatus. We have seen [seepp. 168 ff.] that we were only able to explain the formation of dreams byventuring upon the hypothesis of there being two psychical agencies, oneof which submitted the activity of the other to a criticism which involvedits exclusion from consciousness. The critical agency, we concluded, standsin a closer relation to consciousness than the agency criticized: it standslike a screen between the latter and consciousness. Further, we found rea-sons [p. 494] for identifying the critical agency with the agency which di-rects our waking life and determines our voluntary, conscious actions. If,in accordance with our assumptions, we replace these agencies by systems,then our last conclusion must lead us to locate the critical system at themotor end of the apparatus. We will now introduce the two systems intoour schematic picture and give them names to express their relation toconsciousness (Fig. 3).
We will describe the last of the systems at the motor end as ‘the precon-
scious,’ to indicate that the excitatory processes occurring in it can enterconsciousness without further impediment provided that certain otherconditions are fulﬁlled: for instance, that they reach a certain degree of in-tensity, that the function which can only be described as ‘attention’ is dis-542 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Footnote added 1925:] I have since suggested that consciousness actually arises in-
stead of the memory-trace. See my ‘Note upon the “Mystic Writing-Pad”’ (1925 a).
[Cf. also Chapter IV of Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g ), where the same
point is made.—The whole of the present discussion on memory will be made
more intelligible by a study of these two passages from Freud’s later writings. Butstill more light is thrown on it by some of his earlier reﬂections on the subject re-vealed in the Fliess correspondence (Freud, 1950 a). See, for instance, Section 3 of
Part I of the ‘Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology’ (written in the autumn of 1895)and Letter 52 (written on December 6, 1896). This letter, incidentally, containswhat is evidently an early version of the ‘schematic picture’ represented above aswell as the ﬁrst appearance of the abbreviations by which the various systems arehere distinguished. The equivalent English symbols are self-explanatory: ‘Cs. ’ for
the ‘conscious’ system, ‘Pcs. ’ for the ‘preconscious,’ ‘Ucs. ’ for the ‘unconscious,’
‘Pcpt. ’ for the ‘perceptual’ and ‘Mnem.’ for the ‘mnemic’ systems.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 542tributed in a particular way [see p. 590], and so on. This is at the same
time the system which holds the key to voluntary movement. We will de-scribe the system that lies behind it as ‘the unconscious,’ because it has noaccess to consciousness except via the preconscious, in passing through
which its excitatory process is obliged to submit to modiﬁcations.
1
In which of these systems, then, are we to locate the impetus to the
construction of dreams? For simplicity’s sake, in the system Ucs. It is true
that in the course of our future discussion we shall learn that this is not en-tirely accurate, and that the process of forming dreams is obliged to attachitself to dream-thoughts belonging to the preconscious system [p. 562].But when we consider the dream-wish, we shall ﬁnd that the motive forcefor producing dreams is supplied by the Ucs. [p. 561]; and owing to this
latter factor we shall take the unconscious system as the starting-point ofdream-formation. Like all other thought-structures, this dream-instigatorwill make an effort to advance into the Pcs. and from there to obtain access
to consciousness.
Experience shows us that this path leading through the preconscious
to consciousness is barred to the dream-thoughts during the daytime bythe censorship imposed by resistance. During the night they are able toobtain access to consciousness; but the question arises as to how they do543 B. Regression
1 [Footnote added 1919:] If we attempted to proceed further with this schematic
picture, in which the systems are set out in linear succession, we should have to
reckon with the fact that the system next beyond the Pcs. is the one to which
consciousness must be ascribed—in other words, that Pcpt. = Cs. [See below, pp.
609 ff. For a fuller discussion of this see Freud, 1917 d.—Freud’s later ‘schematic
picture’ of the mind, ﬁrst given in The Ego and the Id (1923b), Chapter II, and
repeated (with some modiﬁcations) in the New Introductory Lectures (1933a ),
Lecture XXXI, lays more stress on structure than on function.]Mnem Mnem'Pcpt Pcs Ucs
Fig. 3
/H208549780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 543so and thanks to what modiﬁcation. If what enabled the dream-thoughts
to achieve this were the fact that at night there is a lowering of the resis-tance which guards the frontier between the unconscious and the precon-scious, we should have dreams which were in the nature of ideas andwhich were without the hallucinatory quality in which we are at the mo-ment interested. Thus the lowering of the censorship between the two sys-tems Ucs. and Pcs. can only explain dreams formed like ‘Autodidasker’ and
not dreams like that of the burning child which we took as the starting-point of our investigations.
The only way in which we can describe what happens in hallucinatory
dreams is by saying that the excitation moves in a backward direction. In-
stead of being transmitted towards the motor end of the apparatus it
moves towards the sensory end and ﬁnally reaches the perceptual system.
If we describe as ‘progressive’ the direction taken by psychical processesarising from the unconscious during waking life, then we may speak ofdreams as having a ‘regressive’ character.
1
This regression, then, is undoubtedly one of the psychological charac-
teristics of the process of dreaming; but we must remember that it doesnot occur only in dreams. Intentional recollection and other constituentprocesses of our normal thinking involve a retrogressive movement in thepsychical apparatus from a complex ideational act back to the raw mate-rial of the memory-traces underlying it. In the waking state, however, thisbackward movement never extends beyond the mnemic images; it doesnot succeed in producing a hallucinatory revival of the perceptual images.
Why is it otherwise in dreams? When we were considering the work ofcondensation in dreams we were driven to suppose that the intensities at-taching to ideas can be completely transferred by the dream-work fromone idea to another [p. 345]. It is probably this alteration in the normal544 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Footnote added 1914:] The ﬁrst hint at the factor of regression is to be found as
far back as in Albertus Magnus [the thirteenth century Scholastic writer]. The
‘imaginatio, ’ he tells us, constructs dreams out of the stored-up images of sensory
objects; and the process is carried out in a reverse direction to that in waking life.(Quoted by Diepgen, 1912, 14.)—Hobbes writes in the Leviathan (1651, Pt. I,
Chapter 2): ‘In sum, our dreams are the reverse of our waking imaginations, themotion, when we are awake, beginning at one end, and when we dream at an-other.’ (Quoted by Havelock Ellis, 1911, 109.)—[Breuer, in Section I of Chap-ter III of Breuer and Freud, 1895, speaks (in connection with hallucinations) of‘a “regressive” excitation, emanating from the organ of memory, and actingupon the perceptual apparatus by means of ideas.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 544psychical procedure which makes possible the cathexis of the system Pcpt.
in the reverse direction, starting from thoughts, to the pitch of complete
sensory vividness.
We must not delude ourselves into exaggerating the importance of these
considerations. We have done no more than give a name to an inexplicable
phenomenon. We call it ‘regression’ when in a dream an idea is turned backinto the sensory image from which it was originally derived. But even thisstep requires justiﬁcation. What is the point of this nomenclature if itteaches us nothing new? I believe the name ‘regression’ is of help to us in sofar as it connects a fact that was already known to us with our schematicpicture, in which the mental apparatus was given a sense or direction. Andit is at this point that that picture begins to repay us for having constructedit. For an examination of it, without any further reﬂection, reveals a furthercharacteristic of dream-formation. If we regard the process of dreaming asa regression occurring in our hypothetical mental apparatus, we at once ar-rive at the explanation of the empirically established fact that all the logicalrelations belonging to the dream-thoughts disappear during the dream- activity or can only ﬁnd expression with difﬁculty [p. 328]. According toour schematic picture, these relations are contained not in the ﬁrst Mnem.
systems but in later ones; and in case of regression they would necessarily
lose any means of expression except in perceptual images. In regression the
fabric of the dream-thoughts is resolved into its raw material.
What modiﬁcation is it that renders possible a regression which cannot
occur in daytime? We must be content with some conjectures on thispoint. No doubt it is a question of changes in the cathexes of energy at-taching to the different systems, changes which increase or diminish thefacility with which those systems can be passed through by the excitatoryprocess. But in any apparatus of this kind the same results upon the pas-sage of excitations might be produced in more than one way. Our ﬁrstthoughts will of course be of the state of sleep and the changes in cathexiswhich it brings about at the sensory end of the apparatus. During the daythere is a continuous current from the Pcpt. system ﬂowing in the direc-
tion of motor activity; but this current ceases at night and could no longerform an obstacle to a current of excitation ﬂowing in the opposite sense.Here we seem to have the ‘shutting-out of the external world,’ which someauthorities regard as the theoretical explanation of the psychological char-acteristics of dreams. (See pp. 80.)
In explaining regression in dreams, however, we must bear in mind the
regressions which also occur in pathological waking states; and here the545 B. Regression9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 545 explanation just given leaves us in the lurch. For in those cases regression oc-
curs in spite of a sensory current ﬂowing without interruption in a forwarddirection. My explanation of hallucinations in hysteria and paranoia and ofvisions in mentally normal subjects is that they are in fact regressions—thatis, thoughts transformed into images—but that the only thoughts that un-dergo this transformation are those which are intimately linked with mem-ories that have been suppressed or have remained unconscious.
For instance, one of my youngest hysterical patients, a twelve-year-old
boy, was prevented from falling asleep by ‘green faces with red eyes’ which
terriﬁed him. The source of this phenomenon was a suppressed, thoughat one time conscious, memory of a boy whom he had often seen fouryears earlier. This boy had presented him with an alarming picture of theconsequences of bad habits in children, including masturbation—a habitwith which my patient was now reproaching himself in retrospect. Hismother had pointed out at the time that the ill-behaved boy had a green-
ish face and red (i.e. red-rimmed) eyes. Here was the origin of his bogey,
whose only purpose, incidentally, was to remind him of another of hismother’s predictions—that boys of that sort grow into idiots, can learnnothing at school and die young. My little patient had fulﬁlled one partof the prophecy, for he was making no progress at his school, and, as wasshown from his account of the involuntary thoughts that occurred tohim, he was terriﬁed of the other part. I may add that after a short timethe treatment resulted in his being able to sleep, in his nervousness disap-pearing and his being awarded a mark of distinction at the end of hisschool-year.
In the same connection I will give the explanation of a vision that was
described to me by another hysterical patient (a woman of forty) as havinghappened before she fell ill. One morning she opened her eyes and saw herbrother in the room, though, as she knew, he was in fact in an insane asy-lum. Her small son was sleeping in the bed beside her. To save the childfrom having a fright and falling into convulsions when he saw his uncle, she
pulled the sheet over his face, whereupon the apparition vanished. This vi-
sion was a modiﬁed version of a memory from the lady’s childhood; and,though it was conscious, it was intimately related to all the unconsciousmaterial in her mind. Her nurse had told her that her mother (who haddied very young, when my patient was only eighteen months old) had suf-fered from epileptic or hysterical convulsions, which went back to a fright
caused by her brother (my patient’s uncle ) appearing to her disguised as a
ghost with a sheet over his head. Thus the vision contained the same ele-546 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 546ments as the memory: the brother’s appearance, the sheet, the fright and
its results. But the elements had been arranged in a different context andtransferred on to other ﬁgures. The obvious motive of the vision, or of thethoughts which it replaced, was her concern lest her little boy might followin the footsteps of his uncle, whom he greatly resembled physically.
The two instances that I have quoted are neither of them entirely de-
void of connection with the state of sleep and for that reason are perhapsnot well chosen for what I want them to prove. I will therefore refer thereader to my analysis of a woman suffering from hallucinatory paranoia(Freud, 1896b [Part III]) as well as to the ﬁndings in my still unpublished
studies on the psychology of the psychoneuroses,
1for evidence that in
such instances of the regressive transformation of thoughts we must notoverlook the inﬂuence of memories, most from childhood, which havebeen suppressed or have remained unconscious. The thoughts which areconnected with a memory of this kind and which are forbidden expres-sion by the censorship are, as it were, attracted by the memory into re-gression as being the form of representation in which the memory itselfis couched. I may also recall that one of the facts arrived at in the Studies
on Hysteria [Breuer and Freud, 1895—e.g. in Breuer’s ﬁrst case history]
was that when it was possible to bring infantile scenes (whether they werememories or phantasies) into consciousness, they were seen like halluci-nations and lost that characteristic only in the process of being reported.It is moreover a familiar observation that, even in those whose memory isnot normally of a visual type, the earliest recollections of childhood retainfar into life the quality of sensory vividness.
If we now bear in mind how great a part is played in the dream-thoughts
by infantile experiences or by phantasies based upon them, how frequentlyportions of them re-emerge in the dream-content and how often thedream-wishes themselves are derived from them, we cannot dismiss theprobability that in dreams too the transformation of thoughts into visualimages may be in part the result of the attraction which memories couchedin visual form and eager for revival bring to bear upon thoughts cut offfrom consciousness and struggling to ﬁnd expression. On this view a dreammight be described as a substitute for an infantile scene modiﬁed by being
transferred on to a recent experience. The infantile scene is unable to bring
about its own revival and has to be content with returning as a dream.547 B. Regression
1 [Never published under any such title.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 547This indication of the way in which infantile scenes (or their repro-
ductions as phantasies) function in a sense as models for the content of
dreams, removes the necessity for one of the hypotheses put forward byScherner and his followers in regard to internal sources of stimulation.Scherner [1861] supposes that, when dreams exhibit particularly vivid orparticularly copious visual elements, there is present a state of ‘visual stim-ulation,’ that is, of internal excitation in the organ of vision [cf. p. 247].We need not dispute this hypothesis, but can content ourselves with as-suming that this state of excitation applies merely to the psychical percep-
tual system of the visual organ; we may, however, further point out thatthe state of excitation has been set up by a memory, that it is a revival of a
visual excitation which was originally an immediate one. I cannot pro-duce any good example from my own experience of an infantile memory
producing this kind of result. My dreams are in general less rich in sen-sory elements than I am led to suppose is the case in other people. But inthe case of my most vivid and beautiful dream of the last few years I waseasily able to trace back the hallucinatory clarity of the dream’s contentto the sensory qualities of recent or fairly recent impressions. On pp. 470ff. I recorded a dream in which the deep blue colour of the water, thebrown of the smoke coming from the ship’s funnels, and the dark brownand red of the buildings left behind a profound impression on me. Thisdream, if any, should be traceable to a visual stimulus. What was it thathad brought my visual organ into this state of stimulation? A recent im-pression, which attached itself to a number of earlier ones. The colourswhich I saw were in the ﬁrst instance those of a box of toy bricks withwhich, on the day before the dream, my children had put up a ﬁne build-ing and shown it off for my admiration. The big bricks were of the samedark red and the small ones were of the same blue and brown. This wasassociated with colour impressions from my last travels in Italy: the beau-tiful blue of the Isonzo and the lagoons and the brown of the Carso.
1The
beauty of the colours in the dream was only a repetition of somethingseen in my memory.
Let us bring together what we have found out about the peculiar
propensity of dreams to recast their ideational content into sensory images.We have not explained this feature of the dream-work, we have not traced548 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [The limestone plateau behind T rieste.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 548it back to any known psychological laws; but we have rather picked it out
as something that suggests unknown implications and we have character-ized it with the word ‘regressive.’ We have put forward the view that in allprobability this regression, wherever it may occur, is an effect of a resis-tance opposing the progress of a thought into consciousness along the nor-mal path, and of a simultaneous attraction exercised upon the thought bythe presence of memories possessing great sensory force.
1In the case of
dreams, regression may perhaps be further facilitated by the cessation ofthe progressive current which streams in during the daytime from thesense organs; in other forms of regression, the absence of this accessory fac-tor must be made up for by a greater intensity of the other motives for re-gression. Nor must we forget to observe that in these pathological cases ofregression as well as in dreams the process of transference of energy mustdiffer from what it is in regressions occurring in normal mental life, sincein the former cases that process makes possible a complete hallucinatorycathexis of the perceptual systems. What we have described, in our analysisof the dream-work, as ‘regard for representability’ might be brought intoconnection with the selective attraction exercised by the visually recollected
scenes touched upon by the dream-thoughts.
It is further to be remarked
2that regression plays a no less important part
in the theory of the formation of neurotic symptoms than it does in that ofdreams. Three kinds of regression are thus to be distinguished: (a) topo-
graphical regression, in the sense of the schematic picture of the  ψ- systems
which we have explained above; ( b)temporal regression, in so far as what is
in question is a harking back to older psychical structures; and (c )formal re-
gression, where primitive methods of expression and representation take theplace of the usual ones. All these three kinds of regression are, however, oneat bottom and occur together as a rule; for what is older in time is moreprimitive in form and in psychical topography lies nearer to the perceptualend. [Cf. Freud, 1917 d.]549 B. Regression
1 [Footnote added 1914:] In any account of the theory of repression it would have
to be laid down that a thought becomes repressed as a result of the combined in-
ﬂuence upon it of two factors. It is pushed from the one side (by the censorship
of the Cs. ) and pulled from the other (by the Ucs. ), in the same kind of way in
which people are conveyed to the top of the Great Pyramid. [ Added 1919:] Cf.
[the opening pages of] my paper on repression (Freud, 1915 d).
2 [This paragraph was added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 549Nor can we leave the subject of regression in dreams1without setting
down in words a notion by which we have already repeatedly been struck
and which will recur with fresh intensity when we have entered moredeeply into the study of the psychoneuroses: namely that dreaming is onthe whole an example of regression to the dreamer’s earliest condition, arevival of his childhood, of the instinctual impulses which dominated itand of the methods of expression which were then available to him. Be-hind this childhood of the individual we are promised a picture of a phy-logenetic childhood—a picture of the development of the human race, ofwhich the individual’s development is in fact an abbreviated recapitulationinﬂuenced by the chance circumstances of life. We can guess how much tothe point is Nietzsche’s assertion that in dreams ‘some primaeval relic ofhumanity is at work which we can now scarcely reach any longer by a di-rect path’; and we may expect that the analysis of dreams will lead us to aknowledge of man’s archaic heritage, of what is psychically innate in him.Dreams and neuroses seem to have preserved more mental antiquities thanwe could have imagined possible; so that psycho-analysis may claim a highplace among the sciences which are concerned with the reconstruction ofthe earliest and most obscure periods of the beginnings of the human race.
It may well be that this ﬁrst portion of our psychological study of
dreams will leave us with a sense of dissatisfaction. But we can consoleourselves with the thought that we have been obliged to build our wayout into the dark. If we are not wholly in error, other lines of approachare bound to lead us into much the same region and the time may thencome when we shall ﬁnd ourselves more at home in it.
(C)
WISH-FULFILMENT
The dream of the burning child at the beginning of this chapter gives
us a welcome opportunity of considering the difﬁculties with which thetheory of wish-fulﬁlment is faced. It will no doubt have surprised all of usto be told that dreams are nothing other than fulﬁlments of wishes, and550 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [This paragraph was added in 1919.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 550not only on account of the contradiction offered by anxiety-dreams.
When analysis ﬁrst revealed to us that a meaning and a psychical value layconcealed behind dreams, we were no doubt quite unprepared to ﬁnd thatthat meaning was of such a uniform character. According to Aristotle’s ac-curate but bald deﬁnition, a dream is thinking that persists (in so far aswe are asleep) in the state of sleep. [Cf. p. 37.] Since, then, our daytimethinking produces psychical acts of such various sorts—judgements, in-ferences, denials, expectations, intentions, and so on—why should it beobliged during the night to restrict itself to the production of wishesalone? Are there not, on the contrary, numerous dreams which show uspsychical acts of other kinds—worries, for instance—transformed intodream-shape? And was not the dream with which we began this chapter(a quite particularly transparent one) precisely a dream of this sort? Whenthe glare of light fell on the eyes of the sleeping father, he drew the worry-ing conclusion that a candle had fallen over and might have set the deadbody on ﬁre. He turned this conclusion into a dream by clothing it in asensory situation and in the present tense. What part was played in thisby wish-fulﬁlment? Can we fail to see in it the predominating inﬂuenceof a thought persisting from waking life or stimulated by a new sense- impression? All this is quite true and compels us to enter more closely intothe part played by wish-fulﬁlment in dreams and into the importance ofwaking thoughts which persist into sleep.
We have already been led by wish-fulﬁlment itself to divide dreams into
two groups. We have found some dreams which appeared openly as wish-fulﬁlments, and others in which the wish-fulﬁlment was unrecognizableand often disguised by every possible means. In the latter we have perceivedthe dream-censorship at work. We found the undistorted wishful dreamsprincipally in children; though short, frankly wishful dreams seemed (and I
lay emphasis upon this qualiﬁcation) to occur in adults as well.
We may next ask where the wishes that come true in dreams originate.
What contrasting possibilities or what alternatives have we in mind in raising this question? It is the contrast, I think, between the consciouslyperceived life of daytime and a psychical activity which has remained un-conscious and of which we can only become aware at night. I can distin-guish three possible origins for such a wish. (1) It may have been arousedduring the day and for external reasons may not have been satisﬁed; in thatcase an acknowledged wish which has not been dealt with is left over forthe night. (2) It may have arisen during the day but been repudiated; in551 C. Wish-Fulfilment9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 551that case what is left over is a wish which has not been dealt with but has
been suppressed. (3) It may have no connection with daytime life and beone of those wishes which only emerge from the suppressed part of themind and become active in us at night. If we turn again to our schematicpicture of the psychical apparatus, we shall localize wishes of the ﬁrst kindin the system Pcs.; we shall suppose that wishes of the second kind have
been driven out of the system Pcs. into the Ucs., where, if at all, they con-
tinue to exist; and we shall conclude that wishful impulses of the third kindare altogether incapable of passing beyond the system Ucs. The question
then arises whether wishes derived from these different sources are of equalimportance for dreams and have equal power to instigate them.
If we cast our minds over the dreams that are at our disposal for an-
swering this question, we shall at once be reminded that we must add afourth source of dream-wishes, namely the current wishful impulses thatarise during the night (e.g. those stimulated by thirst or sexual needs). Inthe next place, we shall form the opinion that the place of origin of adream-wish probably has no inﬂuence on its capacity for instigatingdreams. I may recall the little girl’s dream which prolonged a trip on thelake that had been interrupted during the day and the other children’sdreams which I have recorded. [See pp. 152 ff.] They were explained asbeing due to unfulﬁlled, but unsuppressed, wishes from the previous day.Instances of a wish that has been suppressed in the daytime ﬁnding its wayout in a dream are exceedingly numerous. I will add a further very simpleexample of this class. The dreamer was a lady who was rather fond of mak-ing fun of people and one of whose friends, a woman younger than herself,had just become engaged. All day long she had been asked by her acquain-tances whether she knew the young man and what she thought of him.She had replied with nothing but praises, with which she had silenced herreal judgement; for she would have liked to tell the truth—that he was a‘Dutzendmensch’ [literally a ‘dozen man,’ a very commonplace sort of
 person—people like him are turned out by the dozen ]. She dreamt that
night that she was asked the same question, and replied with the formula:‘In the case of repeat orders it is sufﬁcient to quote the number.’ We have learnt,
lastly, from numerous analyses that wherever a dream has undergone dis-tortion the wish has arisen from the unconscious and was one which couldnot be perceived during the day. Thus it seems at a ﬁrst glance as thoughall wishes are of equal importance and equal power in dreams.
I cannot offer any proof here that the truth is nevertheless otherwise;
but I may say that I am strongly inclined to suppose that dream-wishes552 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 552are more strictly determined. It is true that children’s dreams prove be-
yond a doubt that a wish that has not been dealt with during the day canact as a dream-instigator. But it must not be forgotten that it is a child’s
wish, a wishful impulse of the strength proper to children. I think it ishighly doubtful whether in the case of an adult a wish that has not beenfulﬁlled during the day would be strong enough to produce a dream. Itseems to me, on the contrary, that, with the progressive control exercisedupon our instinctual life by our thought-activity, we are more and moreinclined to renounce as unproﬁtable the formation or retention of suchintense wishes as children know. It is possible that there are individual dif-ferences in this respect, and that some people retain an infantile type ofmental process longer than others, just as there are similar differences inregard to the diminution of visual imagery, which is so vivid in earlyyears. But in general, I think, a wish that has been left over unfulﬁlledfrom the previous day is insufﬁcient to produce a dream in the case of anadult. I readily admit that a wishful impulse originating in the consciouswill contribute to the instigation of a dream, but it will probably not do
more than that. The dream would not materialize if the preconsciouswish did not succeed in ﬁnding reinforcement from elsewhere.
From the unconscious, in fact. My supposition is that a conscious wish
can only become a dream-instigator if it succeeds in awakening an unconsciouswish with the same tenor and in obtaining reinforcement from it. From indi-cations derived from the psycho-analysis of the neuroses, I consider thatthese unconscious wishes are always on the alert, ready at any time to ﬁndtheir way to expression when an opportunity arises for allying themselveswith an impulse from the conscious and for transferring their own greatintensity on to the latter’s lesser one.
1It will then appear as though the
conscious wish alone had been realized in the dream; only some small553 C. Wish-Fulfilment
1 They share this character of indestructibility with all other mental acts which are
truly unconscious, i.e. which belong to the system Ucs. only. These are paths
which have been laid down once and for all, which never fall into disuse and
which, whenever an unconscious excitation re-cathects them, are always ready toconduct the excitatory process to discharge. If I may use a simile, they are onlycapable of annihilation in the same sense as the ghosts in the underworld of theOdyssey—ghosts which awoke to new life as soon as they tasted blood. Processeswhich are dependent on the preconscious system are destructible in quite anothersense. The psychotherapy of the neuroses is based on this distinction. [See below,p. 576.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 553 peculiarity in the dream’s conﬁguration will serve as a ﬁnger-post to put
us on the track of the powerful ally from the unconscious. These wishes inour unconscious, ever on the alert and, so to say, immortal, remind one ofthe legendary Titans, weighed down since primaeval ages by the massivebulk of the mountains which were once hurled upon them by the victori-ous gods and which are still shaken from time to time by the convulsionof their limbs. But these wishes, held under repression, are themselves ofinfantile origin, as we are taught by psychological research into the neu-roses. I would propose, therefore, to set aside the assertion made just now[p. 552], that the place of origin of dream-wishes is a matter of indiffer-
ence and replace it by another one to the following effect: a wish which is
represented in a dream must be an infantile one. In the case of adults it orig-
inates from the Ucs., in the case of children, where there is as yet no divi-
sion or censorship between the Pcs. and the Ucs., or where that division is
only gradually being set up, it is an unfulﬁlled, unrepressed wish fromwaking life. I am aware that this assertion cannot be proved to hold uni-versally; but it can be proved to hold frequently, even in unsuspected cases,and it cannot be contradicted as a general proposition.
In my view, therefore, wishful impulses left over from conscious wak-
ing life must be relegated to a secondary position in respect to the forma-tion of dreams. I cannot allow that, as contributors to the content ofdreams, they play any other part than is played, for instance, by the ma-terial of sensations which become currently active during sleep. [See p.248.] I shall follow the same line of thought in now turning to considerthose psychical instigations to dreaming, left over from waking life, whichare other than wishes. When we decide to go to sleep, we may succeed in
temporarily bringing to an end the cathexes of energy attaching to ourwaking thoughts. Anyone who can do this easily is a good sleeper; theﬁrst Napoleon seems to have been a model of this class. But we do not al-ways succeed in doing so, nor do we always succeed completely. Unsolvedproblems, tormenting worries, overwhelming impressions—all thesecarry thought-activity over into sleep and sustain mental processes in thesystem that we have named the preconscious. If we wish to classify thethought-impulses which persist in sleep, we may divide them into the fol-lowing groups: (1) what has not been carried to a conclusion during theday owing to some chance hindrance; (2) what has not been dealt withowing to the insufﬁciency of our intellectual power—what is unsolved;(3) what has been rejected and suppressed during the daytime. To these554 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 554we must add (4) a powerful group consisting of what has been set in ac-
tion in our Ucs. by the activity of the preconscious in the course of the
day; and ﬁnally (5) the group of daytime impressions which are indiffer-ent and have for that reason not been dealt with.
There is no need to underestimate the importance of the psychical in-
tensities which are introduced into the state of sleep by these residues ofdaytime life, and particularly of those in the group of unsolved problems.It is certain that these excitations continue to struggle for expression dur-ing the night; and we may assume with equal certainty that the state ofsleep makes it impossible for the excitatory process to be pursued in thehabitual manner in the preconscious and brought to an end by becomingconscious. In so far as our thought-processes are able to become consciousin the normal way at night, we are simply not asleep. I am unable to saywhat modiﬁcation in the system Pcs. is brought about by the state of
sleep;
1but there can be no doubt that the psychological characteristics
of sleep are to be looked for essentially in modiﬁcations in the cathexis ofthis particular system—a system that is also in control of access to thepower of movement, which is paralysed during sleep. On the other hand,nothing in the psychology of dreams gives me reason to suppose thatsleep produces any modiﬁcations other than secondary ones in the stateof things prevailing in the Ucs. No other course, then, lies open to excita-
tions occurring at night in the Pcs. than that followed by wishful exci -
tations arising from the Ucs.; the preconscious excitations must ﬁnd
reinforcement from the Ucs. and must accompany the unconscious exci-
tations along their circuitous paths. But what is the relation of the pre-conscious residues of the previous day to dreams? There is no doubt that
they ﬁnd their way into dreams in great quantity, and that they make useof the content of dreams in order to penetrate into consciousness evenduring the night. Indeed they occasionally dominate the content of adream and force it to carry on the activity of daytime. It is certain, too,that the day’s residues may be of any other character just as easily aswishes; but it is highly instructive in this connection, and of positively de-cisive importance for the theory of wish-fulﬁlment, to observe the condi-tion to which they must submit in order to be received into a dream.555 C. Wish-Fulfilment
1 [Footnote added 1919:] I have tried to penetrate further into an understanding
of the state of things prevailing during sleep and of the determining conditions
of hallucination in a paper entitled ‘A Metapsychological Supplement to theTheory of Dreams’ [Freud, 1917 d].9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 555Let us take one of the dreams I have already recorded—for instance, the
one in which my friend Otto appeared with the signs of Graves’ disease.
(See pp. 286 ff.) I had been worried during the previous day by Otto’slooks; and, like everything else concerned with him, this worry affected meclosely. And it pursued me, as I may assume, into my sleep. I was probablyanxious to discover what could be wrong with him. This worry found ex-pression during the night in the dream I have described, the content ofwhich was in the ﬁrst place nonsensical and in the second place was in norespect the fulﬁlment of a wish. I then began to investigate the origin ofthis inappropriate expression of the worry I had felt during the day, andby means of analysis I found a connection through the fact of my havingidentiﬁed my friend with a certain Baron L. and myself with Professor R.There was only one explanation of my having been obliged to choose thisparticular substitute for my daytime thought. I must have been preparedat all times in my Ucs. to identify myself with Professor R., since by means
of that identiﬁcation one of the immortal wishes of childhood—the mega-lomaniac wish—was fulﬁlled. Ugly thoughts hostile to my friend, whichwere certain to be repudiated during the day, had seized the opportunityof slipping through with the wish and getting themselves represented inthe dream; but my daytime worry had also found some sort of expressionin the content of the dream by means of a substitute. [Cf. p. 284.] Thedaytime thought, which was not in itself a wish but on the contrary aworry, was obliged to ﬁnd a connection in some way or other with an in-fantile wish which was now unconscious and suppressed, and whichwould enable it—suitably decocted, it is true—to ‘originate’ in conscious-ness. The more dominating was the worry, the more far-fetched a linkcould be established; there was no necessity for there being any connectionwhatever between the content of the wish and that of the worry, and infact no such connection existed in our example.
It may perhaps be useful
1to continue our examination of the same ques-
tion by considering how a dream behaves when the dream-thoughts presentit with material which is the complete reverse of a wish- fulﬁlment—well-justiﬁed worries, painful reﬂections, distressing realizations. The manypossible outcomes can be classed under the two following groups. (A) Thedream-work may succeed in replacing all the distressing ideas by contraryones and in suppressing the unpleasurable affects attaching to them. The re-556 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [This paragraph and the two following ones were added in 1919.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 556sult will be a straightforward dream of satisfaction, a palpable ‘wish-
 fulﬁlment,’ about which there seems no more to be said. (B) The distressingideas may make their way, more or less modiﬁed but none the less quite rec-ognizable, into the manifest content of the dream. This is the case whichraises doubts as to the validity of the wish theory of dreams and needs fur-ther investigation. Dreams of this sort with a distressing content may eitherbe experienced with indifference, or they may be accompanied by the wholeof the distressing affect which their ideational content seems to justify, orthey may even lead to the development of anxiety and to awakening.
Analysis is able to demonstrate that these unpleasurable dreams are
wish-fulﬁlments no less than the rest. An unconscious and repressed wish,whose fulﬁlment the dreamer’s ego could not fail to experience as some-thing distressing, has seized the opportunity offered to it by the persistingcathexis of the distressing residues of the previous day; it has lent them itssupport and by that means rendered them capable of entering a dream.But whereas in Group A the unconscious wish coincided with the con-scious one, in Group B the gulf between the unconscious and the con-scious (between the repressed and the ego) is revealed and the situation inthe fairy tale of the three wishes which were granted by the fairy to thehusband and wife is realized. (See below, p. 579 n.) The satisfaction at the
fulﬁlment of the repressed wish may turn out to be so great that it coun-terbalances the distressing feelings attaching to the day’s residues [cf. p.508]; in that cass the feeling-tone of the dream is indifferent, in spite of itsbeing on the one hand the fulﬁlment of a wish and on the other the fulﬁl-ment of a fear. Or it may happen that the sleeping ego takes a still largershare in the constructing of the dream, that it reacts to the satisfying of therepressed wish with violent indignation and itself puts an end to the dreamwith an outburst of anxiety. Thus there is no difﬁculty in seeing that un-pleasurable dreams and anxiety-dreams are just as much wish-fulﬁlmentsin the sense of our theory as are straightforward dreams of satisfaction.
Unpleasurable dreams may also be ‘punishment-dreams.’ [See pp. 479
ff.] It must be admitted that their recognition means in a certain sense anew addition to the theory of dreams. What is fulﬁlled in them is equallyan unconscious wish, namely a wish that the dreamer may be punishedfor a repressed and forbidden wishful impulse. To that extent dreams ofthis kind fall in with the condition that has been laid down here that themotive force for constructing a dream must be provided by a wish be-longing to the unconscious. A closer psychological analysis, however,557 C. Wish-Fulfilment9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 557shows how they differ from other wishful dreams. In the cases forming
Group B the dream-constructing wish is an unconscious one and belongsto the repressed, while in punishment-dreams, though it is equally an un-conscious one, it must be reckoned as belonging not to the repressed butto the ‘ego.’ Thus punishment-dreams indicate the possibility that theego may have a greater share than was supposed in the construction ofdreams. The mechanism of dream-formation would in general be greatlyclariﬁed if instead of the opposition between ‘conscious’ and ‘uncon-scious’ we were to speak of that between the ‘ego’ and the ‘repressed.’This cannot be done, however, without taking account of the processesunderlying the psychoneuroses, and for that reason it has not been carriedout in the present work. I will only add that punishment-dreams are notin general subject to the condition that the day’s residues shall be of a dis-tressing kind. On the contrary, they occur most easily where the oppositeis the case—where the day’s residues are thoughts of a satisfying naturebut the satisfaction which they express is a forbidden one. The only traceof these thoughts that appears in the manifest dream is their diametricopposite, just as in the case of dreams belonging to Group A. The essen-tial characteristic of punishment-dreams would thus be that in their casethe dream-constructing wish is not an unconscious wish derived from therepressed (from the system Ucs.), but a punitive one reacting against it
and belonging to the ego, though at the same time an unconscious (thatis to say, preconscious) one.
1
I will report a dream of my own2in order to illustrate what I have just
said, and in particular the way in which the dream-work deals with aresidue of distressing anticipations from the previous day.
‘Indistinct beginning. I said to my wife that I had a piece of news for her,
something quite special. She was alarmed and refused to listen. I assured herthat on the contrary it was something that she would be very glad to hear, andbegan to tell her that our son’s ofﬁcer’s mess had sent a sum of money (5000558 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Footnote added 1930:] This would be the appropriate point for a reference to
the ‘super-ego,’ one of the later ﬁndings of psychoanalysis. [Cf. p. 482, n.—A
class of dreams which are an exception to the ‘wish-theory’ (those which occur
in traumatic neuroses) is discussed in Chapter II of Beyond the Pleasure Principle(1920g ) and in the last pages of Lecture XXIX in the New Introductory Lectures
(1933a).]
2 [This paragraph and the two following ones were added as a footnote in 1919,
and incorporated in the text in 1930.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 558Kronen? ) . . . something about distinction . . . distribution. . . . Meanwhile I
had gone with her into a small room, like a storeroom, to look for something.
Suddenly I saw my son appear. He was not in uniform but in tight-ﬁttingsports clothes ( like a seal?) , with a little cap. He climbed up on to a basket that
was standing beside a cupboard, as though he wanted to put something on thecupboard. I called out to him: no reply. It seemed to me that his face or fore-head was bandaged. He was adjusting something in his mouth, pushing some-thing into it. And his hair was ﬂecked with grey. I thought: “Could he be asexhausted as all that? And has he got false teeth?” Before I could call outagain I woke up, feeling no anxiety but with my heart beating rapidly. Mybedside clock showed that it was two thirty.’
Once again it is impossible for me to present a complete analysis. I
must restrict myself to bringing out a few salient points. Distressing an-ticipations from the previous day were what gave rise to the dream: wehad once more been without news of our son at the front for over a week.It is easy to see that the content of the dream expressed a conviction thathe had been wounded or killed. Energetic efforts were clearly being madeat the beginning of the dream to replace the distressing thoughts by theircontrary. I had some highly agreeable news to communicate—somethingabout money being sent . . . distinction . . . distribution. (The sum ofmoney was derived from an agreeable occurrence in my medical practice;it was an attempt at a complete diversion from the topic.) But these ef-forts failed. My wife suspected something dreadful and refused to listento me. The disguises were too thin and references to what it was soughtto repress pierced through them everywhere. If my son had been killed,his fellow-ofﬁcers would send back his belongings and I should have todistribute what he left among his brothers and sisters and other people.A ‘distinction’ is often awarded to an ofﬁcer who has fallen in battle.Thus the dream set about giving direct expression to what it had ﬁrstsought to deny, though the inclination towards wish-fulﬁlment was stillshown at work in the distortions. (The change of locality during thedream is no doubt to be understood as what Silberer [1912] has describedas ‘threshold symbolism.’ [Cf. above, pp. 508.]) We cannot tell, it is true,what it was that provided the dream with the motive force for thus givingexpression to my distressing thoughts. My son did not appear as someone‘falling’ but as someone ‘climbing.’ He had in fact been a keen moun-taineer. He was not in uniform but in sports clothes; this meant that theplace of the accident that I now feared had been taken by an earlier, sport-
ing one; for he had had a fall during a skiing expedition and broken his559 C. Wish-Fulfilment9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 559thigh. The way in which he was dressed, on the other hand, which made
him look like a seal, at once recalled someone younger—our funny littlegrandson; while the grey hair reminded me of the latter’s father, our son-in-law, who had been hard hit by the war. What could this mean? . . . butI have said enough of it.—The locality in a store-closet and the cupboardfrom which he wanted to take something (‘on which he wanted to putsomething’ in the dream)—these allusions reminded me unmistakably ofan accident of my own which I had brought on myself when I was be-tween two and three years old.
1I had climbed up on to a stool in the
store-closet to get something nice that was lying on a cupboard or table.The stool had tipped over and its corner had struck me behind my lowerjaw; I might easily, I reﬂected, have knocked out all my teeth. The recol-lection was accompanied by an admonitory thought: ‘that serves youright’; and this seemed as though it was a hostile impulse aimed at thegallant soldier. Deeper analysis at last enabled me to discover what theconcealed impulse was which might have found satisfaction in thedreaded accident to my son: it was the envy which is felt for the youngby those who have grown old, but which they believe they have com-pletely stiﬂed. And there can be no question that it was precisely thestrength of the painful emotion which would have arisen if such a misfor-
tune had really happened that caused that emotion to seek out a repressedwish-fulﬁlment of this kind in order to ﬁnd some consolation.
2
I am now in a position to give a precise account of the part played in
dreams by the unconscious wish. I am ready to admit that there is a wholeclass of dreams the instigation to which arises principally or even exclu-
sively from the residues of daytime life; and I think that even my wishthat I might at long last become a Professor Extraordinarius might haveallowed me to sleep through the night in peace if my worry over myfriend’s health had not still persisted from the previous day (p. 207). Butthe worry alone could not have made a dream. The motive force which the
dream required had to be provided by a wish; it was the business of theworry to get hold of a wish to act as the motive force of the dream.
The position may be explained by an analogy. A daytime thought may
very well play the part of entrepreneur for a dream; but the entrepreneur,560 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Cf. p. 50, footnote.]
2  [This dream is discussed brieﬂy in its possible telepathic aspect at the beginning
of Freud’s paper on ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (1922 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 560who, as people say, has the idea and the initiative to carry it out, can do
nothing without capital; he needs a capitalist who can afford the outlay,
and the capitalist who provides the psychical outlay for the dream is in-variably and indisputably, whatever may be the thoughts of the previousday, a wish from the unconscious.
1
Sometimes the capitalist is himself the entrepreneur, and indeed in the
case of dreams this is the commoner event: an unconscious wish is stirredup by daytime activity and proceeds to construct a dream. So, too, theother possible variations in the economic situation that I have taken as ananalogy have their parallel in dream-processes. The entrepreneur may him-
self make a small contribution to the capital; several entrepreneurs may ap-
ply to the same capitalist; several capitalists may combine to put up whatis necessary for the entrepreneur. In the same way, we come across dreams
that are supported by more than one dream-wish; and so too with othersimilar variations, which could easily be run through, but which would beof no further interest to us. We must reserve until later what remains tobe said of the dream-wish.
The tertium comparationis [third element of comparison] in the analogy
that I have just used—the quantity
2put at the disposal of the entrepreneur
in an appropriate amount—is capable of being applied in still greater detailto the purpose of elucidating the structure of dreams. In most dreams it ispossible to detect a central point which is marked by peculiar sensory in-tensity, as I have shown on pp. 322 [and 345 f.]. This central point is as arule the direct representation of the wish-fulﬁlment, for, if we undo the dis-placements brought about by the dream-work, we ﬁnd that the psychical in-
tensity of the elements in the dream-thoughts has been replaced by thesensory intensity of the elements in the content of the actual dream. The
 elements in the neighbourhood of the wish- fulﬁlment often have nothing to
do with its meaning, but turn out to be derivatives of distressing thoughtsthat run contrary to the wish. But owing to their being in what is often anartiﬁcially established connection with the central element, they have ac-quired enough intensity to become capable of being represented in thedream. Thus the wish-fulﬁlment’s power of bringing about representation561 C. Wish-Fulfilment
1 [These last two paragraphs are quoted in full by Freud at the end of his analysis
of Dora’s ﬁrst dream (1905 e, Part II), which, he comments, is a complete con-
ﬁrmation of their correctness.]
2 [Of capital in the case of the analogy, and of psychical energy in the case of a
dream.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 561is diffused over a certain sphere surrounding it, within which all the
 elements—including even those possessing no means of their own— become empowered to obtain representation. In the case of dreams that areactuated by several wishes, it is easy to delimit the spheres of the different
wish-fulﬁlments, and gaps in the dream may often be understood as fron-tier zones between those spheres.
1
Though the preceding considerations have reduced the importance of
the part played by the day’s residues in dreams, it is worth while devotinga little more attention to them. It must be that they are essential ingredi-ents in the formation of dreams, since experience has revealed the surpris-ing fact that in the content of every dream some link with a recent daytimeimpression—often of the most insigniﬁcant sort—is to be detected. Wehave not hitherto been able to explain the necessity for this addition to themixture that constitutes a dream (see p. 203 f.). And it is only possible todo so if we bear ﬁrmly in mind the part played by the unconscious wishand then seek for information from the psychology of the neuroses. Welearn from the latter that an unconscious idea is as such quite incapable ofentering the preconscious and that it can only exercise any effect there byestablishing a connection with an idea which already belongs to the pre-conscious, by transferring its intensity on to it and by getting itself ‘cov-ered’ by it. Here we have the fact of ‘transference,’
2which provides an
explanation of so many striking phenomena in the mental life of neurotics.The preconscious idea, which thus acquires an undeserved degree of in-tensity, may either be left unaltered by the transference, or it may have amodiﬁcation forced upon it, derived from the content of the idea whicheffects the transference. I hope I may be forgiven for drawing analogies562 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1[A particularly clear summary of the part played by the ‘day’s residues’ in the con-
struction of dreams will be found in the course of Freud’s short paper, 1913a .]
2 [In his later writings Freud regularly used this same word ‘transference’ ( ‘Über-
tragung’ ) to describe a somewhat different, though not unrelated, psychological
process, ﬁrst discovered by him as occurring in the course of psycho-analytic
treatment—namely, the process of ‘transferring’ on to a contemporary objectfeelings which originally applied, and still unconsciously apply, to an infantileobject. (See, e.g., Freud, 1905 e, Section IV; and Freud, 1915a .) The word occurs
also in this other sense in the present volume—e.g. on pp. 207 and 221—andhad already been so used by Freud in the last pages of Chapter IV of Studies on
Hysteria (Breuer and Freud, 1895).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 562from everyday life, but I am tempted to say that the position of a repressed
idea resembles that of an American dentist in this country: he is not al-lowed to set up in practice unless he can make use of a legally qualiﬁedmedical practitioner to serve as a stalking-horse and to act as a ‘cover’ inthe eyes of the law. And just as it is not exactly the physicians with thelargest practices who form alliances of this kind with dentists, so in thesame way preconscious or conscious ideas which have already attracted asufﬁcient amount of the attention that is operating in the preconsciouswill not be the ones to be chosen to act as covers for a repressed idea. Theunconscious prefers to weave its connections round preconscious impres-sions and ideas which are either indifferent and have thus had no attentionpaid to them, or have been rejected and have thus had attention promptlywithdrawn from them. It is a familiar article in the doctrine of associa-tions, and one that is entirely conﬁrmed by experience, that an idea whichis bound by a very intimate tie in one direction, tends, as it were, to repelwhole groups of new ties. I once attempted to base a theory of hystericalparalyses on this proposition.
1
If we assume that the same need for transference on the part of re-
pressed ideas which we have discovered in analysing the neuroses is alsoat work in dreams, two of the riddles of the dream are solved at a blow:the fact, namely, that every analysis of a dream shows some recent impres-sion woven into its texture and that this recent element is often of themost trivial kind [p. 203]. I may add that (as we have already found else-where [p. 200]) the reason why these recent and indifferent elements sofrequently ﬁnd their way into dreams as substitutes for the most ancientof all the dream-thoughts is that they have least to fear from the censor-ship imposed by resistance. But while the fact that trivial elements are
preferred is explained by their freedom from censorship, the fact that re-
cent elements occur with such regularity points to the existence of a need
for transference. Both groups of impressions satisfy the demand of the re-pressed for material that is still clear of associations—the indifferent onesbecause they have given no occasion for the formation of many ties, andthe recent ones because they have not yet had time to form them.
It will be seen, then, that the day’s residues, among which we may now
class the indifferent impressions, not only borrow something from the Ucs.
when they succeed in taking a share in the formation of a dream—namely563 C. Wish-Fulfilment
1 [See Section IV of Freud, 1893 c.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 563the instinctual force which is at the disposal of the repressed wish—but
that they also offer the unconscious something indispensable—namely the
necessary point of attachment for a transference. If we wished to penetratemore deeply at this point into the processes of the mind, we should haveto throw more light upon the interplay of excitations between the precon-scious and the unconscious—a subject towards which the study of the psy-choneuroses draws us, but upon which, as it happens, dreams have no helpto offer.
I have only one thing more to add about the day’s residues. There can
be no doubt that it is they that are the true disturbers of sleep and notdreams, which, on the contrary are concerned to guard it. I shall return tothis point later. [See pp. 576 ff.]
We have so far been studying dream-wishes: we have traced them from
their origin in the region of the Ucs. and have analysed their relations to
the day’s residues, which in their turn may either be wishes or psychicalimpulses of some other kind or simply recent impressions. In this way wehave allowed room for every claim that may be raised by any of the multi-farious waking thought-activities on behalf of the importance of the partplayed by them in the process of constructing dreams. It is not impossible,even, that our account may have provided an explanation of the extremecases in which a dream, pursuing the activities of daytime, arrives at ahappy solution of some unsolved problem of waking life.
1All we need is
an example of this kind, so that we might analyse it and trace the sourceof the infantile or repressed wishes whose help has been enlisted and hasreinforced the efforts of preconscious activity with such success. But allthis has not brought us a step nearer to solving the riddle of why it is thatthe unconscious has nothing else to offer during sleep but the motiveforces for the fulﬁlment of a wish. The answer to this question must throw
light upon the psychical nature of wishes, and I propose to give the answerby reference to our schematic picture of the psychical apparatus.
There can be no doubt that that apparatus has only reached its present
perfection after a long period of development. Let us attempt to carry itback to an earlier stage of its functioning capacity. Hypotheses, whose jus-tiﬁcation must be looked for in other directions, tell us that at ﬁrst the ap-paratus’s efforts were directed towards keeping itself so far as possible free564 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [See above, pp. 93 f. An instance of this is mentioned in a footnote at the end of
Section II of The Ego and the Id (Freud, 1923b).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 564from stimuli;1consequently its ﬁrst structure followed the plan of a reﬂex
apparatus, so that any sensory excitation impinging on it could be
promptly discharged along a motor path. But the exigencies of life inter-fere with this simple function, and it is to them, too, that the apparatusowes the impetus to further development. The exigencies of life confrontit ﬁrst in the form of the major somatic needs. The excitations producedby internal needs seek discharge in movement, which may be described asan ‘internal change’ or an ‘expression of emotion.’ A hungry baby screamsor kicks helplessly. But the situation remains unaltered, for the excitationarising from an internal need is not due to a force producing a momentary
impact but to one which is in continuous operation. A change can onlycome about if in some way or other (in the case of the baby, through out-side help) an ‘experience of satisfaction’ can be achieved which puts an endto the internal stimulus. An essential component of this experience of sat-isfaction is a particular perception (that of nourishment, in our example)the mnemic image of which remains associated thenceforward with thememory trace of the excitation produced by the need. As a result of thelink that has thus been established, next time this need arises a psychicalimpulse will at once emerge which will seek to re-cathect the mnemic im-age of the perception and to re-evoke the perception itself, that is to say,to re-establish the situation of the original satisfaction. An impulse of thiskind is what we call a wish; the reappearance of the perception is the ful-ﬁlment of the wish; and the shortest path to the fulﬁlment of the wish is apath leading direct from the excitation produced by the need to a com-plete cathexis of the perception. Nothing prevents us from assuming thatthere was a primitive state of the psychical apparatus in which this pathwas actually traversed, that is, in which wishing ended in hallucinating.Thus the aim of this ﬁrst psychical activity was to produce a ‘perceptualidentity’
2—a repetition of the perception which was linked with the satis-
faction of the need.565 C. Wish-Fulfilment
1 [This is the so-called ‘Principle of Constancy’ which is discussed in the opening
pages of Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g). But it was already a fundamental
assumption in some of Freud’s earliest psychological writings, e.g. in his post -
humously published ‘Letter to Josef Breuer’ of June 29, 1892 (Freud, 1941 a).
The whole gist of the present paragraph is already stated in Sections 1, 2, 11 and
16 of Part I of his ‘Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology’ written in the autumn of1895 (Freud, 1950a). Cf. Editor’s Introduction, pp. xiv ff.]
2 [I.e. something perceptually identical with the ‘experience of satisfaction.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 565The bitter experience of life must have changed this primitive thought-
activity into a more expedient secondary one. The establishment of a per-
ceptual identity along the short path of regression within the apparatusdoes not have the same result elsewhere in the mind as does the cathexisof the same perception from without. Satisfaction does not follow; theneed persists. An internal cathexis could only have the same value as an ex-ternal one if it were maintained unceasingly, as in fact occurs in hallucina-tory psychoses and hunger phantasies, which exhaust their whole psychicalactivity in clinging to the object of their wish. In order to arrive at a moreefﬁcient expenditure of psychical force, it is necessary to bring the regres-sion to a halt before it becomes complete, so that it does not proceed be-yond the mnemic image, and is able to seek out other paths which leadeventually to the desired perceptual identity being established from the di-rection of the external world.
1This inhibition of the regression and the
subsequent division of the excitation become the business of a second sys-tem, which is in control of voluntary movement—which for the ﬁrst time,that is, makes use of movement for purposes remembered in advance. Butall the complicated thought-activity which is spun out from the mnemicimage to the moment at which the perceptual identity is established by theexternal world—all this activity of thought merely constitutes a round-about path to wish-fulﬁlment which has been made necessary by experi-ence.
2Thought is after all nothing but a substitute for a hallucinatory
wish; and it is self-evident that dreams must be wish-fulﬁlments, sincenothing but a wish can set our mental apparatus at work. Dreams, whichfulﬁl their wishes along the short path of regression, have merely preservedfor us in that respect a sample of the psychical apparatus’s primary methodof working, a method which was abandoned as being inefﬁcient. Whatonce dominated waking life, while the mind was still young and incom-petent, seems now to have been banished into the night—just as the prim-itive weapons, the bows and arrows, that have been abandoned by adultmen, turn up once more in the nursery. Dreaming is a piece of infantile566 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1[Footnote added 1919:] In other words, it becomes evident that there must be a
means of ‘reality-testing’ [i.e. of testing things to see whether they are real or not].
2 The wish-fulﬁlling activity of dreams is justly extolled by Le Lorrain, who speaks
of it as ‘sans fatigue sérieuse, sans être obligé de recourir à cette lutte opiniâtre et
longue qui use et corrode les jouissances poursuivies [incurring no serious fatigueand not being obliged to embark upon the long and obstinate struggle thatwears away and spoils enjoyments that have to be pursued.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 566mental life that has been superseded. These methods of working on the part
of the psychical apparatus, which are normally suppressed in wakinghours, become current once more in psychosis and then reveal their inca-pacity for satisfying our needs in relation to the external world.
1
The unconscious wishful impulses clearly try to make themselves ef -
fective in daytime as well, and the fact of transference, as well as the psy-choses, show us that they endeavour to force their way by way of thepreconscious system into consciousness and to obtain control of thepower of movement. Thus the censorship between the Ucs. and the Pcs.,
the  assumption of whose existence is positively forced upon us by dreams,deserves to be recognized and respected as the watchman of our mentalhealth. Must we not regard it, however, as an act of carelessness on thepart of that watchman that it relaxes its activities during the night, allowsthe suppressed impulses in the Ucs. to ﬁnd expression, and makes it pos-
sible for hallucinatory regression to occur once more? I think not. Foreven though this critical watchman goes to rest—and we have proof thatits slumbers are not deep—it also shuts the door upon the power of movement.—No matter what impulses from the normally inhibited Ucs.may prance upon the stage, we need feel no concern; they remain harm-less, since they are unable to set in motion the motor apparatus by whichalone they might modify the external world. The state of sleep guaranteesthe security of the citadel that must be guarded. The position is less harm-less when what brings about the displacement of forces is not the nightlyrelaxation in the critical censorship’s output of force, but a pathologicalreduction in that force or a pathological intensiﬁcation of the unconsciousexcitations while the preconscious is still cathected and the gateway to thepower of movement stands open. When this is so, the watchman is over-powered, the unconscious excitations overwhelm the Pcs., and thence ob-
tain control over our speech and actions; or they forcibly bring abouthallucinatory regression and direct the course of the apparatus (which wasnot designed for their use) by virtue of the attraction exercised by percep-tions on the distribution of our psychical energy. To this state of things wegive the name of psychosis.567 C. Wish-Fulfilment
1 [Footnote added 1914:] I have elsewhere carried this train of thought further in a
paper on the two principles of mental functioning (Freud, 1911 b)—the pleasure
principle and the reality principle, as I have proposed calling them. [The argu-
ment is in fact developed further below, on pp. 594 ff.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 567We are now well on the way to proceeding further with the erection
of the psychological scaffolding, which we stopped at the point at which
we introduced the two systems Ucs. and Pcs. But there are reasons for
continuing a little with our consideration of wishes as the sole psychicalmotive force for the construction of dreams. We have accepted the ideathat the reason why dreams are invariably wish-fulﬁlments is that they areproducts of the system Ucs., whose activity knows no other aim than the
fulﬁlment of wishes and which has at its command no other forces thanwishful impulses. If we insist, for even a moment longer, upon our rightto base such far-reaching psychological speculations upon the interpreta-tion of dreams, we are in duty bound to prove that those speculationshave enabled us to insert dreams into a nexus which can include otherpsychical structures as well. If such a thing as a system Ucs. exists (or
something analogous to it for the purposes of our discussion), dreamscannot be its only manifestation; every dream may be a wish-fulﬁlment,but apart from dreams there must be other forms of abnormal wish- fulﬁlments. And it is a fact that the theory governing all psychoneuroticsymptoms culminates in a single proposition, which asserts that they too
are to be regarded as fulﬁlments of unconscious wishes.
1Our explanation
makes the dream only the ﬁrst member of a class which is of the greatestsigniﬁcance to psychiatrists and an understanding of which implies thesolution of the purely psychological side of the problem of psychiatry.
2
The other members of this class of wish-fulﬁlments—hysterical symp-
toms, for instance—possess one essential characteristic, however, which Icannot discover in dreams. I have learnt from the researches which I havementioned so often in the course of this work that in order to bring aboutthe formation of a hysterical symptom both currents of our mind must
converge. A symptom is not merely the expression of a realized uncon-scious wish; a wish from the preconscious which is fulﬁlled by the samesymptom must also be present. So that the symptom will have at least two
determinants, one arising from each of the systems involved in the con-ﬂict. As in the case of dreams, there are no limits to the further determi-568 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Or more correctly, one portion of the symptom corre-
sponds to the unconscious wish-fulﬁlment and another portion to the mental
structure reacting against the wish.
2 [Footnote added 1914:] As Hughlings Jackson said: ‘Find out all about dreams
and you will have found out all about insanity.’ [Quoted by Ernest Jones (1911),who had heard it at ﬁrst hand from Hughlings Jackson.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 568nants that may be present—to the ‘overdetermination’ of the symptoms.1
The determinant which does not arise from the Ucs. is invariably, so far
as I know, a train of thought reacting against the unconscious wish—a
self-punishment, for instance. I can therefore make the quite general as-sertion that a hysterical symptom develops only where the fulﬁlments of two
opposing wishes, arising each from a different psychical system, are able to con-verge in a single expression. (Compare in this connection my most recent
formulations on the origin of hysterical symptoms in my paper on hys-terical phantasies and their relation to bisexuality. [Freud, 1908a.]
2) Ex-
amples would serve very little purpose here, since nothing but anexhaustive elucidation of the complications involved could carry convic-tion. I will therefore leave my assertion to stand for itself and only quotean example in order to make the point clear, and not to carry conviction.In one of my women patients, then, hysterical vomiting turned out to beon the one hand the fulﬁlment of an unconscious phantasy dating fromher puberty—of a wish, that is, that she might be continuously pregnantand have innumerable children, with a further wish, added later, that shemight have them by as many men as possible. A powerful defensive im-pulse had sprung up against this unbridled wish. And, since the patientmight lose her ﬁgure and her good looks as a result of her vomiting, andso might cease to be attractive to anyone, the symptom was acceptable tothe punitive train of thought as well; and since it was permitted by bothsides it could become a reality. This was the same method of treating awish-fulﬁlment as was adopted by the Parthian queen towards the Romantriumvir Crassus. Believing that he had embarked on his expedition outof love of gold, she ordered molten gold to be poured down his throatwhen he was dead: ‘Now,’ she said, ‘you have what you wanted.’ But allthat we so far know about dreams is that they express the fulﬁlment of awish from the unconscious; it seems as though the dominant, precon-scious system acquiesces in this after insisting upon a certain number ofdistortions. Nor is it possible as a general rule to ﬁnd a train of thoughtopposed to the dream-wish and, like its counterpart, realized in thedream. Only here and there in dream analyses do we come upon signs ofreactive creations, like, for instance, my affectionate feelings for my friendR. in the dream of my uncle [with the yellow beard] (cf. pp. 174 ff.). But569 C. Wish-Fulfilment
1 [Cf. Freud in Breuer and Freud, 1895, Chapter IV, Section 1, Observation 3.]
2 [This sentence was added in 1909.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 569we can ﬁnd the missing ingredients from the preconscious elsewhere.
Whereas the wish from the Ucs. is able to ﬁnd expression in the dream af-
ter undergoing distortions of every kind, the dominant system withdrawsinto a wish to sleep, realizes that wish by bringing about the modiﬁcations
which it is able to produce in the cathexes within the psychical apparatus,and persists in that wish throughout the whole duration of sleep.
1
This determined wish on the part of the preconscious to sleep exercises
a generally facilitating effect on the formation of dreams. Let me recall thedream dreamt by the man who was led to infer from the glare of light com-ing out of the next room that his child’s body might be on ﬁre [pp. 513ff.]. The father drew this inference in a dream instead of allowing himselfto be woken up by the glare; and we have suggested that one of the psychi-cal forces responsible for this result was a wish which prolonged by that onemoment the life of the child whom he pictured in the dream. Otherwishes, originating from the repressed, probably escape us, since we are un-able to analyse the dream. But we may assume that a further motive forcein the production of the dream was the father’s need to sleep; his sleep, likethe child’s life, was prolonged by one moment by the dream. ‘Let thedream go on’—such was his motive—‘or I shall have to wake up.’ In everyother dream, just as in this one, the wish to sleep lends its support to theunconscious wish. On pp. 150 f. I described some dreams which appearedopenly as dreams of convenience. But in fact all dreams can claim a rightto the same description. The operation of the wish to continue sleeping ismost easily to be seen in arousal dreams, which modify external sensorystimuli in such a way as to make them compatible with a continuance ofsleep; they weave them into a dream in order to deprive them of any pos-sibility of acting as reminders of the external world. That same wish must,however, play an equal part in allowing the occurrence of all other dreams,though it may only be from within that they threaten to shake the subject
out of his sleep. In some cases, when a dream carries things too far, the Pcs.
says to consciousness: ‘Never mind! go on sleeping! after all it’s only adream!’ [See pp. 493 f.] But this describes in general the attitude of ourdominant mental activity towards dreams, though it may not be openly ex-pressed. I am driven to conclude that throughout our whole sleeping state we570 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 I have borrowed this idea from the theory of sleep put forward by Liébeault
(1889), to whom is due the revival in modern times of research into hypnotism.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 570know just as certainly that we are dreaming as we know that we are sleeping.
We must not pay too much attention to the counter- argument that ourconsciousness is never brought to bear on the latter piece of knowledge andthat it is only brought to bear on the former on particular occasions whenthe censorship feels that it has, as it were, been taken off its guard.
On the other hand,
1there are some people who are quite clearly aware
during the night that they are asleep and dreaming and who thus seem topossess the faculty of consciously directing their dreams. If, for instance, adreamer of this kind is dissatisﬁed with the turn taken by a dream, he canbreak it off without waking up and start it again in another direction—just as a popular dramatist may under pressure give his play a happier end-ing. Or another time, if his dream has led him into a sexually excitingsituation, he can think to himself: ‘I won’t go on with this dream any fur-ther and exhaust myself with an emission; I’ll hold it back for a real situa-tion instead.’
The Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denys [1867, 268 ff.],
2quoted by
Vaschide (1911, 139), claimed to have acquired the power of acceleratingthe course of his dreams just as he pleased, and of giving them any direc-tion he chose. It seems as though in his case the wish to sleep had givenplace to another preconscious wish, namely to observe his dreams and en-joy them. Sleep is just as compatible with a wish of this sort as it is with amental reservation to wake up if some particular condition is fulﬁlled(e.g. in the case of a nursing mother or wet-nurse) [p. 244]. Moreover, itis a familiar fact that anyone who takes an interest in dreams remembersa considerably greater number of them after waking.
Ferenczi (1911),
3in the course of a discussion of some other observa-
tions upon the directing of dreams, remarks: ‘Dreams work over thethoughts which are occupying the mind at the moment from every angle;they will drop a dream-image if it threatens the success of a wish- fulﬁlmentand will experiment with a fresh solution, till at last they succeed in con-structing a wish-fulﬁlment which satisﬁes both agencies of the mind as acompromise.’571 C. Wish-Fulfilment
1 [This paragraph was added in 1909.]
2 [This paragraph was added in 1914.]
3 [This paragraph was added as a footnote in 1914 and included in the text in
1930.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 571(D)
AROUSAL BY DREAMS—THE FUNCTION OF
DREAMS—ANXIETY-DREAMS
Now that we know that all through the night the preconscious is
 concentrated upon the wish to sleep, we are in a position to carry our un-
derstanding of the process of dreaming a stage further. But ﬁrst let us sum -marize what we have learnt so far.
The situation is this. Either residues of the previous day have been left
over from the activity of waking life and it has not been possible to with-draw the whole cathexis of energy from them; or the activity of waking lifeduring the course of the day has led to the stirring up of an unconsciouswish; or these two events have happened to coincide. (We have  already dis-cussed the various possibilities in this connection.) The unconscious wishlinks itself up with the day’s residues and effects a transference on to them;this may happen either in the course of the day or not until a state of sleephas been established. A wish now arises which has been transferred on tothe recent material; or a recent wish, having been suppressed, gains freshlife by being reinforced from the unconscious. This wish seeks to force itsway along the normal path taken by thought- processes, through the Pcs.
(to which, indeed, it in part belongs) to consciousness. But it comes upagainst the censorship, which is still functioning and to the inﬂuence ofwhich it now submits. At this point it takes on the distortion for whichthe way has already been paved by the transference of the wish on to therecent material. So far it is on the way to becoming an obsessive idea or adelusion or something of the kind—that is, a thought which has been in-
tensiﬁed by transference and distorted in its expression by censorship. Itsfurther advance is halted, however, by the sleeping state of the precon-scious. (The probability is that that system has protected itself against theinvasion by diminishing its own excitations.) The dream-process conse-quently enters on a regressive path, which lies open to it precisely owingto the peculiar nature of the state of sleep, and it is led along that path bythe attraction exercised on it by groups of memories; some of these mem-ories themselves exist only in the form of visual cathexes and not as trans-lations into the terminology of the later systems. [Cf. p. 547.] In the572 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 572course of its regressive path the dream-process acquires the attribute of rep-
resentability. (I shall deal later with the question of compression [p. 592].)It has now completed the second portion of its zigzag journey. The ﬁrstportion was a progressive one, leading from the unconscious scenes orphantasies to the preconscious; the second portion led from the frontier ofthe censorship back again to perceptions. But when the content of thedream-process has become perceptual, by that fact it has, as it were, founda way of evading the obstacle put in its way by the censorship and the stateof sleep in the Pcs. [Cf. p. 529.] It succeeds in drawing attention to itself
and in being noticed by consciousness.
For consciousness, which we look upon in the light of a sense organ
for the apprehension of psychical qualities, is capable in waking life of re-ceiving excitations from two directions. In the ﬁrst place, it can receiveexcitations from the periphery of the whole apparatus, the perceptual sys-tem; and in addition to this, it can receive excitations of pleasure and un-pleasure, which prove to be almost the only psychical quality attaching totransposition of energy in the inside of the apparatus. All other processesin the ψ-systems, including the Pcs., are lacking in any psychical quality
and so cannot be objects of consciousness, except in so far as they bringpleasure or unpleasure to perception. We are thus driven to conclude thatthese releases of pleasure and unpleasure automatically regulate the course ofcathectic processes. But, in order to make more delicately adjusted perfor-
mances possible, it later became necessary to make the course of ideas lessdependent upon the presence or absence of unpleasure. For this purposethe Pcs. system needed to have qualities of its own which could attract
consciousness; and it seems highly probably that it obtained them bylinking the preconscious processes with the mnemic system of linguisticsymbols, a system which was not without quality. [See p. 612.] By meansof the qualities of that system, consciousness, which had hitherto been asense organ for perceptions alone, also became a sense organ for a portionof our thought-processes. Now, therefore, there are, as it were, two sen-
sory surfaces, one directed towards perception and the other towards thepreconscious thought-processes.
I must assume that the state of sleep makes the sensory surface of con-
sciousness which is directed towards the Pcs. far more insusceptible to
 ex citation than the surface directed towards the Pcpt. systems. Moreover,
this abandonment of interest in thought-processes during the night has apurpose: thinking is to come to a standstill, for the Pcs. requires sleep.
Once, however, a dream has become a perception, it is in a position to excite573 D. The Function of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 573 consciousness, by means of the qualities it has now acquired. This sensory
excitation proceeds to perform what is its essential function: it directs a partof the available cathectic energy in the Pcs. into attention to what is causing
the excitation. [See p. 590.] It must therefore be admitted that every dreamhas an arousing effect, that it sets a part of the quiescent force of the Pcs. in
action. The dream is then submitted by this force to the inﬂuence whichwe have described as secondary revision with an eye to consecutiveness andintelligibility. That is to say, the dream is treated by it just like any otherperceptual content; it is met by the same anticipatory ideas, in so far as itssubject-matter allows [p. 503]. So far as this third portion of the dream-process has any direction it is once again a progressive one.
To avoid misunderstandings, a word about the chronological relations
of these dream-processes will not be out of place. A very attractive conjec-ture has been put forward by Goblot [1896, 289 f.], suggested, no doubt,by the riddle of Maury’s guillotine dream [p. 58 f.]. He seeks to show thata dream occupies no more than the transition period between sleeping andwaking. The process of awakening takes a certain amount of time, andduring that time the dream occurs. We imagine that the ﬁnal dream-imagewas so powerful that it compelled us to wake; whereas in fact it was onlyso powerful because at that moment we were already on the point of wak-ing. ‘Un rêve c’est un réveil qui commence.’
1
It has already been pointed out by Dugas [1879 b] that Goblot would
have to disregard many facts before he could assert his thesis generally.Dreams occur from which we do not awaken—for instance, some in whichwe dream that we are dreaming. With our knowledge of the dream-work,we could not possibly agree that it only covers the period of awakening. Itseems probable, on the contrary, that the ﬁrst portion of the dream-workhas already begun during the day, under the control of the preconscious.Its second portion—the modiﬁcation imposed by the censorship, the attraction exercised by unconscious scenes, and the forcing of its way toperception—no doubt proceeds all through the night; and in this respectwe may perhaps always be right when we express a feeling of having beendreaming all night long, though we cannot say what. [See p. 521.]
But it seems to me unnecessary to suppose that dream-processes really
maintain, up to the moment of becoming conscious, the chronological or-der in which I have described them: that the ﬁrst thing to appear is thetransferred dream-wish, that distortion by the censorship follows, then the574 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [‘A dream is an awakening that is beginning.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 574regressive change in direction, and so on. I have been obliged to adopt this
order in my description; but what happens in reality is no doubt a simultaneous exploring of one path and another, a swinging of the excita-tion now this way and now that, until at last it accumulates in the directionthat is most opportune and one particular grouping becomes the perma-nent one. Certain personal experiences of my own lead me to suspect thatthe dream-work often requires more than a day and a night in order toachieve its result; and if this is so, we need no longer feel any amazement atthe extraordinary ingenuity shown in the construction of the dream. In myopinion even the demand for the dream to be made intelligible as a percep-tual event may be put into effect before the dream attracts consciousness toitself. From then onwards, however, the pace is accelerated, for at that pointa dream is treated in the same fashion as anything else that is perceived. Itis like a ﬁrework, which takes hours to prepare but goes off in a moment.
The dream-process has by now either acquired sufﬁcient intensity
through the dream-work to attract consciousness to itself and arouse thepreconscious, irrespectively of the time and depth of sleep; or its intensityis insufﬁcient to achieve this and it must remain in a state of readiness until,just before waking, attention becomes more mobile and comes to meet it.The majority of dreams appear to operate with comparatively low psychicalintensities, for they mostly wait until the moment of waking. But this alsoexplains the fact that, if we are suddenly woken from deep sleep, we usuallyperceive something that we have dreamt. In such cases, just as when wewake of our own accord, the ﬁrst thing we see is the perceptual content thathas been constructed by the dream-work and immediately afterwards wesee the perceptual content that is offered to us from outside ourselves.
Greater theoretical interest, however, attaches to the dreams which have
the power to rouse us in the middle of our sleep. Bearing in mind the expe-diency which is everywhere else the rule, we may ask why a dream, that is,an unconscious wish, is given the power to interfere with sleep, that is, withthe fulﬁlment of the preconscious wish. The explanation no doubt lies inrelations of energy of which we have no knowledge. If we possessed suchknowledge, we should probably ﬁnd that allowing the dream to take itscourse and expending a certain amount of more or less detached attentionon it is an economy of energy compared with holding the unconscious astightly under control at night as in the daytime. [Cf. p. 576.] Experienceshows that dreaming is compatible with sleeping, even if it  interrupts sleepseveral times during the night. One wakes up for an instant and then fallsasleep again at once. It is like brushing away a ﬂy in one’s sleep: a case of ad575 D. The Function of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 575hoc awakening. If one falls asleep again, the interruption has been disposed
of. As is shown by such familiar examples as the sleep of a nursing mother
or wet-nurse [p. 244], the fulﬁlment of the wish to sleep is quite compatiblewith maintaining a certain expenditure of attention in some particular direction.
At this point an objection arises, which is based on a better knowledge
of unconscious processes. I myself have asserted that unconscious wishesare always active. But in spite of this they seem not to be strong enoughto make themselves perceptible during the day. If, however, while a stateof sleep prevails, an unconscious wish has shown itself strong enough toconstruct a dream and arouse the preconscious with it, why should thisstrength fail after the dream has been brought to knowledge? Should notthe dream continue to recur perpetually, precisely as the vexatious ﬂykeeps on coming back after it has been driven away? What right have weto assert that dreams get rid of the disturbance of sleep?
It is perfectly true that unconscious wishes always remain active. They
represent paths which can always be traversed, whenever a quantity of exci-tation makes use of them. [Cf. p. 592 n.] Indeed it is a prominent feature ofunconscious processes that they are indestructible. In the unconscious noth-ing can be brought to an end, nothing is past or forgotten. This is broughtmost vividly home to one in studying the neuroses, and especially hysteria.The unconscious path of thoughts, which leads to discharge in a hystericalattack, immediately becomes traversable once more, when sufﬁcient excita-tion has accumulated. A humiliation that was experienced thirty years agoacts exactly like a fresh one throughout the thirty years, as soon as it has ob-tained access to the unconscious sources of emotion. As soon as the memoryof it is touched, it springs into life again and shows itself cathected with ex-citation which ﬁnds a motor discharge in an attack. This is precisely thepoint at which psychotherapy has to intervene. Its task is to make it possiblefor the unconscious processes to be dealt with ﬁnally and be forgotten. Forthe fading of memories and the emotional weakness of impressions whichare no longer recent, which we are inclined to regard as self-evident and toexplain as a primary effect of time upon mental memory-traces, are in realitysecondary modiﬁcations which are only brought about by laborious work.What performs this work is the preconscious, and psychotherapy can pursueno other course than to bring the Ucs. under the domination of the Pcs.
1576 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [The last clause of this sentence was printed in spaced type only from 1919 on-
wards. Cf. p. 553 n.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 576Thus there are two possible outcomes for any particular unconscious
excitatory process. Either it may be left to itself, in which case it eventu-
ally forces its way through at some point and on this single occasion ﬁndsdischarge for its excitation in movement; or it may come under the inﬂu-ence of the preconscious, and its excitation, instead of being discharged,may be bound by the preconscious. This second alternative is the one which
occurs in the process of dreaming. [See p. 597 n.] The cathexis from the Pcs.
which goes halfway to meet the dream after it has become perceptual,having been directed on to it by the excitation in consciousness, binds thedream’s unconscious excitation and makes it powerless to act as a distur-bance. If it is true that the dreamer wakes for an instant, yet he really has
brushed away the ﬂy that was threatening to disturb his sleep, it begins todawn on us that it actually is more expedient and economical to allow the
unconscious wish to take its course, to leave the path to regression opento it so that it can construct a dream, and then to bind the dream and dis-pose of it with a small expenditure of pre-conscious work—rather than tocontinue keeping a tight rein on the unconscious throughout the wholeperiod of sleep. [Cf. p. 575.] It was indeed to be expected that dreaming,even though it may originally have been a process without a useful pur-pose, would have procured itself some function in the interplay of mentalforces. And we can now see what that function is. Dreaming has taken onthe task of bringing back under control of the preconscious the excitationin the Ucs. which has been left free; in so doing, it discharges the Ucs. ex-
citation, serves it as a safety valve and at the same time preserves the sleepof the preconscious in return for a small expenditure of waking activity.Thus, like all the other psychical structures in the series of which it is amember, it constitutes a compromise; it is in the service of both of thetwo systems, since it fulﬁls the two wishes in so far as they are compatiblewith each other. If we turn back to the ‘excretion theory’ of dreams putforward by Robert [1886], which I explained on pp. 105 ff., we shall seeat a glance that in its essence we must accept his account of the function
of dreams, though differing from him in his premises and in his view ofthe dream-process itself. [See pp. 201 f.]
1577 D. The Function of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Is this the only function that can be assigned to dreams?
I know of no other. It is true that Maeder [1912] has attempted to show that
dreams have other, ‘secondary,’ functions. He started out from the correct ob-servation that some dreams contain attempts at solving conﬂicts, attempts whichare later carried out in reality and which thus behave as though they were trial9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 577The qualiﬁcation ‘in so far as the two wishes are compatible with each
other’ implies a hint at the possible case in which the function of dreaming
may come to grief. The dream-process is allowed to begin as a fulﬁlmentof an unconscious wish; but if this attempted wish-fulﬁlment jars upon thepreconscious so violently that it is unable to continue sleeping, then thedream has made a breach in the compromise and has failed to carry outthe second half of its task. In that case the dream is immediately brokenoff and replaced by a state of complete waking. Here again it is not reallythe fault of the dream if it has now to appear in the role of a disturber of
sleep instead of in its normal one of a guardian of sleep; and this fact need
not prejudice us against its having a useful purpose. This is not the onlyinstance in the organism of a contrivance which is normally useful becom-ing useless and disturbing as soon as the conditions that give rise to it aresomewhat modiﬁed; and the disturbance at least serves the new purposeof drawing attention to the modiﬁcation and of setting the organism’s reg-ulative machinery in motion against it. What I have in mind is of coursethe case of anxiety-dreams, and in order that I may not be thought to be578 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
practices for waking actions. He therefore drew a parallel between dreams and
the play of animals and children, which may be regarded as practice in the oper-ation of innate instincts and as preparation for serious activity later on, and putforward the hypothesis that dreams have a ‘fonction ludique’ [‘play function’].
Shortly before Maeder, Alfred Adler [1911, 215 n.], too, had insisted that
dreams possessed a function of ‘thinking ahead.’ (In an analysis which I pub-lished in 1905 [‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria,’ Part II (1905 e)],
a dream, which could only be regarded as expressing an intention, was repeatedevery night until it was carried out. [Cf. above, p. 211 f.])
A little reﬂection will convince us, however, that this ‘secondary’ function of
dreams has no claim to be considered as a part of the subject of dream-interpretation.Thinking ahead, forming intentions, framing attempted solutions which mayperhaps be realized later in waking life, all these, and many other similar things,are products of the unconscious and preconscious activity of the mind; they maypersist in the state of sleep as ‘the day’s residues’ and combine with an uncon-scious wish (cf. pp. 550 ff.) in forming a dream. Thus the dream’s function of‘thinking ahead’ is rather a function of preconscious waking thought, the prod-ucts of which may be revealed to us by the analysis of dreams or of other phe-nomena. It has long been the habit to regard dreams as identical with theirmanifest content; but we must now beware equally of the mistake of confusingdreams with latent dream-thoughts. [Cf. p. 510 n. above and a passage at the end
of the discussion of Case I in Freud’s paper on ‘Dream and Telepathy’ (1922 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 578evading this evidence against the theory of wish- fulﬁlment whenever I
come across it, I will at all events give some hints of their explanation.
There is no longer anything contradictory to us in the notion that a
psychical process which develops anxiety can nevertheless be the fulﬁl-ment of a wish. We know that it can be explained by the fact that thewish belongs to one system, the Ucs., while it has been repudiated and
suppressed by the other system, the Pcs.
1Even where psychical health is
perfect, the subjugation of the Ucs. by the Pcs. is not complete; the mea-
sure of suppression indicates the degree of our psychical normality. Neu-rotic symptoms show that the two systems are in conﬂict with each other;they are the products of a compromise which brings the conﬂict to anend for the time being. On the one hand, they allow the Ucs. an outlet
for the discharge of its excitation, and provide it with a kind of sally-port,579 D. The Function of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1919:] ‘A second factor, which is much more important and far-
reaching, but which is equally overlooked by laymen is the following. No doubt
a wish-fulﬁlment must bring pleasure; but the question then arises “To whom?”To the person who has the wish, of course. But, as we know, a dreamer’s relationto his wishes is a quite peculiar one. He repudiates them and censors them—hehas no liking for them, in short. So that their fulﬁlment will give him no plea-sure, but just the opposite; and experience shows that this opposite appears inthe form of anxiety, a fact which has still to be explained. Thus a dreamer in hisrelation to his dream-wishes can only be compared to an amalgamation of twoseparate people who are linked by some important common element. Instead ofenlarging on this, I will remind you of a familiar fairy tale [referred to above onp. 557] in which you will ﬁnd the same situation repeated. A good fairy prom-ised a poor married couple to grant them the fulﬁlment of their ﬁrst threewishes. They were delighted, and made up their minds to choose their threewishes carefully. But a smell of sausages being fried in the cottage next doortempted the woman to wish for a couple of them. They were there in a ﬂash;and this was the ﬁrst wish-fulﬁlment. But the man was furious, and in his ragewished that the sausages were hanging on his wife’s nose. This happened too;and the sausages were not to be dislodged from their new position. This was thesecond wish-fulﬁlment; but the wish was the man’s, and its fulﬁlment was mostdisagreeable for his wife. You know the rest of the story. Since after all they werein fact one—man and wife—the third wish was bound to be that the sausagesshould come away from the woman’s nose. This fairy tale might be used inmany other connections; but here it serves only to illustrate the possibility thatif two people are not at one with each other the fulﬁlment of a wish of one ofthem may bring nothing but unpleasure to the other.’ ( Introductory Lectures on
Psycho-Analysis [Freud, 1916–17], Lecture XIV.)9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 579while, on the other hand, they make it possible for the Pcs. to control the
Ucs. to some extent. It is instructive to consider, for instance, the signiﬁ-
cance of a hysterical phobia or an agoraphobia. Let us suppose that a neu-
rotic patient is unable to cross the street alone—a condition which werightly regard as a ‘symptom.’ If we remove this symptom by compellinghim to carry out the act of which he believes himself incapable, the con-sequence will be an attack of anxiety; and indeed the occurrence of ananxiety-attack in the street is often the precipitating cause of the onset ofan agoraphobia. We see, therefore, that the symptom has been con-structed in order to avoid an outbreak of anxiety; the phobia is erectedlike a frontier fortiﬁcation against the anxiety.
Our discussion cannot be carried any further without examining the
part played by the affects in these processes; but we can only do so imper-fectly in the present connection. Let us assume, then, that the suppressionof the Ucs. is necessary above all because, if the course of ideas in the Ucs.
were left to itself, it would generate an affect which was originally of a pleas-urable nature, but became unpleasurable after the process of ‘repression’ oc-curred. The purpose, and the result too, of suppression is to prevent thisrelease of unpleasure. The suppression extends over the ideational contentof the Ucs., since the release of unpleasure might start from that content.
This presupposes a quite speciﬁc assumption as to the nature of the gener-ation of affect.
1It is viewed as a motor or secretory function, the key to
whose innervation lies in the ideas in the Ucs. Owing to the domination es-
tablished by the Pcs. these ideas are, as it were, throttled, and inhibited from
sending out impulses which would generate affect. If, therefore, the cathexisfrom the Pcs. ceases, the danger is that the unconscious excitations may re-
lease affect of a kind which (as a result of the repression which has alreadyoccurred) can only be experienced as unpleasure, as anxiety.
This danger materializes if the dream-process is allowed to take its
course. The conditions which determine its realization are that repressionsmust have occurred and that the suppressed wishful impulses shall be ableto grow sufﬁciently strong. These determinants are thus quite outside thepsychological framework of dream-formation. If it were not for the factthat our topic is connected with the subject of the generation of anxietyby the single factor of the liberation of the Ucs. during sleep, I should be
able to omit any discussion of anxiety-dreams and avoid the necessity forentering in these pages into all the obscurities surrounding them.580 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [For this assumption cf. p. 474 and footnote.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 580The theory of anxiety-dreams, as I have already repeatedly declared,
forms part of the psychology of the neuroses.1We have nothing more to
do with it when once we have indicated its point of contact with the topic
of the dream-process. There is only one thing more that I can do. Since Ihave asserted that neurotic anxiety arises from sexual sources, I can sub-mit some anxiety-dreams to analysis in order to show the sexual materialpresent in their dream-thoughts.
2
I have good reasons for leaving on one side in the present discussion
the copious examples afforded by my neurotic patients, and for preferringto quote some anxiety-dreams dreamt by young people.
It is dozens of years since I myself had a true anxiety-dream. But I re-
member one from my seventh or eighth year, which I submitted to inter-pretation some thirty years later. It was a very vivid one, and in it I saw my
beloved mother, with a peculiarly peaceful, sleeping expression on her features,being carried into the room by two ( or three )people with birds’ beaks and laid
upon the bed. I awoke in tears and screaming, and interrupted my parents’sleep. The strangely draped and unnaturally tall ﬁgures with birds’ beakswere derived from the illustrations to Philippson’s Bible.
3I fancy they
must have been gods with falcons’ heads from an ancient Egyptian funer-ary relief. Besides this, the analysis brought to mind an ill-mannered boy,a son of a concierge, who used to play with us on the grass in front of the
house when we were children, and who I am inclined to think was calledPhilipp. It seems to me that it was from this boy that I ﬁrst heard the vul-gar term for sexual intercourse, instead of which educated people alwaysuse a Latin word, ‘to copulate,’ and which was clearly enough indicated bythe choice of the falcons’ heads,
4I must have guessed the sexual signiﬁ-
cance of the word from the face of my young instructor, who was well ac-quainted with the facts of life. The expression on my mother’s features in581 D. The Function of Dreams
1 [The following sentence was added at this point in 1911, but omitted again in
1925 and subsequently: ‘Anxiety in dreams, I should like to insist, is an anxiety
problem and not a dream problem.’]
2 [Some of the comments in what follows would require revision in the light of
Freud’s later views on anxiety. See also pp. 194 ff., 256 and 352.]
3 [Die israelitische Bibel, an edition of the Old Testament in Hebrew and German,
Leipzig, 1839–54 (Second ed. 1858). A footnote to the fourth chapter of Deuter -onomy shows a number of woodcuts of Egyptian gods, several with birds’ heads.]
4 [The German slang term referred to is ‘vögeln, ’ from ‘Vogel’ the ordinary word
for ‘bird.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 581the dream was copied from the view I had had of my grandfather a few
days before his death as he lay snoring in a coma. The interpretation car-ried out in the dream by the ‘secondary revision’ [p. 495] must thereforehave been that my mother was dying; the funerary relief ﬁtted in with this.I awoke in anxiety, which did not cease till I had woken my parents up. Iremember that I suddenly grew calm when I saw my mother’s face, asthough I had needed to be reassured that she was not dead. But this ‘sec-ondary’ interpretation of the dream had already been made under the in-ﬂuence of the anxiety which had developed. I was not anxious because Ihad dreamt that my mother was dying; but I interpreted the dream in thatsense in my preconscious revision of it because I was already under the in-ﬂuence of the anxiety. The anxiety can be traced back, when repression istaken into account, to an obscure and evidently sexual craving that hadfound appropriate expression in the visual content of the dream.
A twenty-seven-year-old man, who had been seriously ill for a year, re-
ported that when he was between eleven and thirteen he had repeatedlydreamt (to the accompaniment of severe anxiety) that a man with a hatchetwas pursuing him; he tried to run away, but seemed to be paralysed and couldnot move from the spot. This is a good example of a very common sort of
anxiety-dream, which would never be suspected of being sexual. In analy-sis, the dreamer ﬁrst came upon a story (dating from a time later than thedream) told him by his uncle, of how he had been attacked in the streetone night by a suspicious-looking individual; the dreamer himself con-cluded from this association that he may have heard of some similarepisode at the time of the dream. In connection with the hatchet, he re-membered that at about that time he had once injured his hand with ahatchet while he was chopping up wood. He then passed immediately tohis relations with his younger brother. He used to ill-treat this brother andknock him down; and he particularly remembered an occasion when hehad kicked him on the head with his boot and had drawn blood, and howhis mother had said: ‘I’m afraid he’ll be the death of him one day.’ Whilehe still seemed to be occupied with the subject of violence, a recollectionfrom his ninth year suddenly occurred to him. His parents had comehome late and had gone to bed while he pretended to be asleep; soon hehad heard sounds of panting and other noises which had seemed to himuncanny, and he had also been able to make out their position in the bed.Further thoughts showed that he had drawn an analogy between this rela-tion between his parents and his own relation to his younger brother. Hehad subsumed what happened between his parents under the concept of582 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 582violence and struggling; and he had found evidence in favour of this view
in the fact that he had often noticed blood in his mother’s bed.
It is, I may say, a matter of daily experience that sexual intercourse be-
tween adults strikes any children who may observe it as something un-canny and that it arouses anxiety in them. I have explained this anxietyby arguing that what we are dealing with is a sexual excitation with whichtheir understanding is unable to cope and which they also, no doubt, re-pudiate because their parents are involved in it, and which is thereforetransformed into anxiety. At a still earlier period of life sexual excitationsdirected towards a parent of the opposite sex have not yet met with re-pression and, as we have seen, are freely expressed. (See pp. 274 ff.)
I should have no hesitation in giving the same explanation of the at-
tacks of night terrors accompanied by hallucinations ( pavor nocturnus )
which are so frequent in children. In this case too it can only be a questionof sexual impulses which have not been understood and which have beenrepudiated. Investigation would probably show a periodicity in the occur-rence of the attacks, since an increase in sexual libido can be brought aboutnot only by accidental exciting impressions but also by successive waves ofspontaneous developmental processes.
I lack a sufﬁciency of material based upon observation to enable me to
conﬁrm this explanation.
1
Paediatricians, on the other hand, seem to lack the only line of
 approach which can make this whole class of phenomena intelligible,whether from the somatic or from the psychical aspect. I cannot resistquoting an amusing instance of the way in which the blinkers of medicalmythology can cause an observer to miss an understanding of such casesby a narrow margin. My instance is taken from a thesis on pavor nocturnus
by Debacker (1881, 66):
A thirteen-year-old boy in delicate health began to be apprehensive
and dreamy. His sleep became disturbed and was interrupted almost oncea week by severe attacks of anxiety accompanied by hallucinations. He al-ways retained a very clear recollection of these dreams. He said that theDevil had shouted at him: ‘Now we’ve got you, now we’ve got you!’There was then a smell of pitch and brimstone and his skin was burnt byﬂames. He woke up from the dream in terror, and at ﬁrst could not cry583 D. The Function of Dreams
1 [Footnote added 1919:] Since I wrote this a great quantity of such material has
been brought forward in psycho-analytic literature.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 583out. When he had found his voice he was clearly heard to say: ‘No, no,
not me; I’ve not done anything!’ or ‘Please not! I won’t do it again!’ orsometimes: ‘Albert never did that!’ Later, he refused to undress ‘becausethe ﬂames only caught him when he was undressed.’ While he was stillhaving these devil-dreams, which were a threat to his health, he was sentinto the country. There he recovered in the course of eighteen months,and once, when he was ﬁfteen, he confessed: ‘Je n’osais pas l’avouer, maisj’éprouvais continuellement des picotements et des surexcitations aux par-
ties
1; à la ﬁn, cela m’énervait tant que plusieurs fois j’ai pensé me jeter par
la fenêtre du dortoir.’2
There is really very little difﬁculty in inferring: (1) that the boy had
masturbated when he was younger, that he had probably denied it, andthat he had been threatened with severe punishment for his bad habit (cf.his admission: ‘Je ne le ferais plus,’ and his denial: ‘Albert n’a jamais faitça’); (2) that with the onset of puberty the temptation to masturbate hadrevived with the tickling in his genitals; but (3) that a struggle for repres-sion had broken out in him, which had suppressed his libido and trans-formed it into anxiety, and that the anxiety had taken over thepunishments with which he had been threatened earlier.
And now let us see the inferences drawn by our author (ibid., 69):
‘The following conclusions can be drawn from this observation:
‘(1) The inﬂuence of puberty upon a boy in delicate health can lead
to a condition of great weakness and can result in a considerable degreeof cerebral anaemia.
3
‘(2) This cerebral anaemia produces character changes, demonomanic
hallucinations and very violent nocturnal (and perhaps also diurnal) anxiety-states.
‘(3) The boy’s demonomania and self-reproaches go back to the in-
ﬂuences of his religious education, which affected him as a child.
‘(4) All the symptoms disappeared in the course of a somewhat pro-
tracted visit to the country, as the result of physical exercise and the re-gaining of strength with the passage of puberty.584 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 I have italicized this word, but it is impossible to misunderstand it.
2 [‘I didn’t dare admit it; but I was continually having prickly feelings and overex-
citement in my parts; in the end it got on my nerves so much that I often
thought of jumping out of the dormitory window.’]
3 The italics are mine.9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 584‘(5) A predisposing inﬂuence upon the origin of the child’s brain con-
dition may perhaps be attributed to heredity and to a past syphilitic in-
fection in his father.’
And here is the ﬁnal conclusion: ‘Nous avons fait entrer cette observa-
tion dans le cadre des délires apyrétiques d’inanition, car c’est à l’ischémiecérébrale que nous rattachons cet état particulier.’
1
(E)
THE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PROCESSES—
REPRESSION
In venturing on an attempt to penetrate more deeply into the psychol-
ogy of dream-processes, I have set myself a hard task, and one to which mypowers of exposition are scarcely equal. Elements in this complicatedwhole which are in fact simultaneous can only be represented successivelyin my description of them, while, in putting forward each point, I mustavoid appearing to anticipate the grounds on which it is based: difﬁcultiessuch as these it is beyond my strength to master. In all this I am paying thepenalty for the fact that in my account of dream-psychology I have beenunable to follow the historical development of my own views. Though myown line of approach to the subject of dreams was determined by my pre-vious work on the psychology of the neuroses, I had not intended to makeuse of the latter as a basis of reference in the present work. Nevertheless Iam constantly being driven to do so, instead of proceeding, as I shouldhave wished, in the contrary direction and using dreams as a means of ap-proach to the psychology of the neuroses. I am conscious of all the troublein which my readers are thus involved, but I can see no means of avoidingit. [See p. 129 n.]
In my dissatisfaction at this state of things, I am glad to pause for a little
over another consideration which seems to put a higher value on my ef-forts. I found myself faced by a topic on which, as has been shown in my585 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes
1 [‘We have classiﬁed this case among the apyretic deliria of inanition, for we at-
tribute this particular state to cerebral ischaemia.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 585ﬁrst chapter, the opinions of the authorities were characterized by the
sharpest contradictions. My treatment of the problems of dreams hasfound room for the majority of these contradictory views. I have onlyfound it necessary to give a categorical denial of two of them—the viewthat dreaming is a meaningless process [pp. 83 ff.] and the view that it is asomatic one [pp. 104 f.]. Apart from this, I have been able to ﬁnd a justi-ﬁcation for all these mutually contradictory opinions at one point or otherof my complicated thesis and to show that they had lighted upon someportion of the truth.
The view that dreams carry on the occupations and interests of waking
life [pp. 41 f.] has been entirely conﬁrmed by the discovery of the con-cealed dream-thoughts. These are only concerned with what seems impor-
tant to us and interests us greatly. Dreams are never occupied with minordetails. But we have also found reason for accepting the contrary view, thatdreams pick up indifferent refuse left over from the previous day [pp. 51ff.] and that they cannot get control of any major daytime interest until ithas been to some extent withdrawn from waking activity [p. 51]. We havefound that this holds good of the dream’s content, which gives expression
to the dream-thoughts in a form modiﬁed by distortion. For reasons con-nected with the mechanism of association, as we have seen, the dream- process ﬁnds it easier to get control of recent or indifferent ideationalmaterial which has not yet been requisitioned by waking thought-activity;and for reasons of censorship it transfers psychical intensity from what isimportant but objectionable on to what is indifferent.
The fact that dreams are hypermnesic [pp. 44 ff.] and have access to
material from childhood [pp. 48 ff.] has become one of the cornerstonesof our teaching. Our theory of dreams regards wishes originating in in-fancy as the indispensable motive force for the formation of dreams.
It has naturally not occurred to us to throw any doubt on the signiﬁ-
cance, which has been experimentally demonstrated, of external sensorystimuli during sleep [pp. 55 ff.]; but we have shown that such materialstands in the same relation to the dream-wish as do the residues ofthought left over from daytime activity. Nor have we seen any reason todispute the view that dreams interpret objective sensory stimuli just as il-lusions do [pp. 60 f.]; but we have found the motive which provides thereason for that interpretation, a reason which has been left unspeciﬁed byother writers. Interpretation is carried out in such a way that the objectperceived shall not interrupt sleep and shall be usable for purposes ofwish- fulﬁlment. As regards subjective states of excitation in the sense or-586 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 586gans during sleep, the occurrence of which seems to have been proved by
T rumbull Ladd [1892; see above, pp. 64 f.], it is true that we have not ac-cepted them as a particular source of dreams; but we have been able toexplain them as resulting from the regressive revival of memories that arein operation behind the dream.
Internal organic sensations, which have commonly been taken as a car-
dinal point in explanations of dreaming [pp. 65 ff.], have retained a place,though a humbler one, in our theory. Such sensations—sensations offalling, for instance, or ﬂoating, or being inhibited—provide a materialwhich is accessible at any time and of which the dream-work makes use,whenever it has need of it, for expressing the dream-thoughts.
The view that the dream-process is a rapid or instantaneous one [p. 92
f.] is in our opinion correct as regards the perception by consciousness ofthe preconstructed dream-content; it seems probable that the precedingportions of the dream-process run a slow and ﬂuctuating course. We havebeen able to contribute towards the solution of the riddle of dreams whichcontain a great amount of material compressed into the briefest momentof time; we have suggested that it is a question in such cases of getting holdof ready-made structures already present in the mind.
The fact that dreams are distorted and mutilated by memory [pp. 76 f.]
is accepted by us but in our opinion constitutes no obstacle; for it is nomore than the last and manifest portion of a distorting activity which hasbeen in operation from the very start of the dream’s formation.
As regards the embittered and apparently irreconcilable dispute as to
whether the mind sleeps at night [p. 83 f.] or is as much in command ofall its faculties as it is by day [pp. 89 f.], we have found that both partiesare right but that neither is wholly right. We have found evidence in thedream-thoughts of a highly complex intellectual function, operating withalmost the whole resources of the mental apparatus. Nevertheless it cannotbe disputed that these dream-thoughts originated during the day, and it isimperative to assume that there is such a thing as a sleeping state of themind. Thus even the theory of partial sleep [p. 103 f.] has shown its value,though we have found that what characterizes the state of sleep is not thedisintegration of mental bonds but the concentration of the psychical sys-tem which is in command during the day upon the wish to sleep. The fac-tor of withdrawal from the external world [pp. 41 f.] retains its signiﬁcancein our scheme; it helps, though not as the sole determinant, to make pos-sible the regressive character of representation in dreams. The renunciationof voluntary direction of the ﬂow of ideas [pp. 78 f.] cannot be disputed;587 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 587but this does not deprive mental life of all purpose, for we have seen how,
after voluntary purposive ideas have been abandoned, involuntary ones as-sume command. We have not merely accepted the fact of the looseness ofassociative connections in dreams [p. 87], but we have shown that it ex-tends far further than had been suspected; we have found, however, thatthese loose connections are merely obligatory substitutes for others whichare valid and signiﬁcant. It is quite true that we have described dreams asabsurd; but examples have taught us how sensible a dream can be evenwhen it appears to be absurd.
We have no difference of opinion over the functions that are to be as-
signed to dreams. The view that dreams act as a safety-valve to the mind[p. 105 f.] and that, in the words of Robert [1886, 10 f.], all kinds ofharmful things are made harmless by being presented in a dream—notonly does this view coincide exactly with our theory of the double wish- fulﬁlment brought about by dreams, but the way in which it is phrased ismore intelligible to us than to Robert himself. The view that the mindhas free play in its functioning in dreams [p. 109] is represented in ourtheory by the fact of the preconscious activity allowing dreams to taketheir course. Such phrases as ‘the return of the mind in dreams to an em-bryonic point of view’ or the words used by Havelock Ellis [1899, 721]to describe dreams—‘an archaic world of vast emotions and imperfectthoughts’ [p. 88]—strike us as happy anticipations of our own assertionsthat primitive modes of activity which are suppressed during the day areconcerned in the construction of dreams. We have been able to accept en-tirely as our own what Sully [1893, 362] has written: ‘Our dreams are ameans of conserving these [earlier] successive personalities. When asleepwe go back to the old ways of looking at things and of feeling aboutthem, to impulses and activities which long ago dominated us’ [p. 89].
1
For us no less than for Delage [1891] what has been ‘suppressed’ [p. 107 f.]has become ‘the motive force of dreams.’
We have fully appreciated the importance of the part ascribed by
 Scherner [1861] to ‘dream-imagination,’ as well as Scherner’s own inter-pretations [pp. 109 ff.], but we have been obliged to transport them, as itwere, to a different position in the problem. The point is not that dreamscreate the imagination, but rather that the unconscious activity of theimagination has a large share in the construction of the dream-thoughts.588 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [This sentence was added in 1914.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 588We remain in Schemer’s debt for having indicated the source of the
dream-thoughts; but nearly everything that he ascribes to the dream-workis really attributable to the activity of the unconscious during daytime,which is the instigating agent of dreams no less than of neurotic symp-toms. We have been obliged to distinguish the ‘dream-work’ as some-thing quite different and with a much narrower connotation.
Finally, we have by no means abandoned the relation between dreams
and mental disorders [pp. 114 ff.], but have established it more ﬁrmly onfresh ground.
We have thus been able to ﬁnd a place in our structure for the most var-
ious and contradictory ﬁndings of earlier writers, thanks to the novelty ofour theory of dreams, which combines them, as it were, into a higherunity. Some of those ﬁndings we have put to other uses, but we havewholly rejected only a few. Nevertheless our ediﬁce is still uncompleted.Apart from the many perplexing questions in which we have become in-volved in making our way into the obscurities of psychology, we seem tobe troubled by a fresh contradiction. On the one hand we have supposedthat the dream-thoughts arise through entirely normal mental activity; buton the other hand we have discovered a number of quite abnormal pro-cesses of thought among the dream-thoughts, which extend into thedream-content, and which we then repeat in the course of our dream- interpretation. Everything that we have described as the ‘dream-work’seems to depart so widely from what we recognize as rational thought- processes that the most severe strictures passed by earlier writers on the lowlevel of psychical functioning in dreams must appear fully justiﬁed.
It may be that we shall only ﬁnd enlightenment and assistance in this
difﬁculty by carrying our investigation still further. And I will begin bypicking out for closer examination one of the conjunctures which maylead to the formation of a dream.
A dream, as we have discovered, takes the place of a number of thoughts
which are derived from our daily life and which form a completely logicalsequence. We cannot doubt, then, that these thoughts originate from ournormal mental life. All the attributes which we value highly in our train ofthought, and which characterize them as complex achievements of a highorder, are to be found once more in dream-thoughts. There is no need toassume, however, that this activity of thought is performed during sleep—a possibility which would gravely confuse what has hitherto been our set-tled picture of the psychical state of sleep. On the contrary, these thoughts589 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 589may very well have originated from the previous day, they may have pro-
ceeded unobserved by our consciousness from their start, and may alreadyhave been completed at the onset of sleep. The most that we can concludefrom this is that it proves that the most complicated achievements of thought
are possible without the assistance of consciousness—a fact which we could notfail to learn in any case from every psycho-analysis of a patient sufferingfrom hysteria or from obsessional ideas. These dream-thoughts are certainlynot in themselves inadmissible to consciousness; there may have been anumber of reasons for their not having become conscious to us during theday. Becoming conscious is connected with the application of a particularpsychical function [p. 542], that of attention—a function which, as itseems, is only available in a speciﬁc quantity, and this may have been di-verted from the train of thought in question on to some other purpose.
1
There is another way, too, in which trains of thought of this kind may bewithheld from consciousness. The course of our conscious reﬂections showsus that we follow a particular path in our application of attention. If, as wefollow this path, we come upon an idea which will not bear criticism, webreak off: we drop the cathexis of attention. Now it seems that the train ofthought which has thus been initiated and dropped can continue to spin it-self out without attention being turned to it again, unless at some point orother it reaches a specially high degree of intensity which forces attentionto it. Thus, if a train of thought is initially rejected (consciously, perhaps)by a judgement that it is wrong or that it is useless for the immediate intel-lectual purposes in view, the result may be that this train of thought willproceed, unobserved by consciousness, until the onset of sleep.
To sum up—we describe a train of thought such as this as ‘precon-
scious’; we regard it as completely rational and believe that it may eitherhave been simply neglected or broken off and suppressed. Let us add afrank account of how we picture the occurrence of a train of ideas. Webelieve that, starting from a purposive idea, a given amount of excitation,which we term ‘cathectic energy,’ is displaced along the associative pathsselected by that purposive idea. A train of thought which is ‘neglected’ isone which has not received this cathexis; a train of thought which is ‘sup-
pressed’ or ‘repudiated’ is one from which this cathexis has been with-590 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [The concept of ‘attention’ plays a very small part in Freud’s later writings. It
ﬁgures prominently, on the other hand, in his ‘Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychol-
ogy’ (Freud, 1950 a), e.g. in the opening section of Part III. Cf. also pp. 573 f.
and 608.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 590drawn. In both cases they are left to their own excitations. Under certain
conditions a train of thought with a purposive cathexis is capable of at-
tracting the attention of consciousness to itself and in that event, throughthe agency of consciousness, receives a ‘hyper-cathexis.’ We shall beobliged presently to explain our view of the nature and function of con-sciousness. [See pp. 610 ff.]
A train of thought that has been set going like this in the preconscious
may either cease spontaneously or persist. We picture the ﬁrst of these out-comes as implying that the energy attaching to the train of thought is dif-fused along all the associative paths that radiate from it; this energy sets thewhole network of thoughts in a state of excitation which lasts for a certaintime and then dies away as the excitation in search of discharge becomestransformed into a quiescent cathexis. If this ﬁrst outcome supervenes, theprocess is of no further signiﬁcance so far as dream- formation is con-cerned. Lurking in our preconscious, however, there are other purposiveideas, which are derived from sources in our unconscious and from wisheswhich are always on the alert. These may take control of the excitation at-taching to the group of thoughts which has been left to its own devices,they may establish a connection between it and an unconscious wish, andthey may ‘transfer’ to it the energy belonging to the unconscious wish.Thenceforward the neglected or suppressed train of thought is in a posi-tion to persist, though the reinforcement it has received gives it no rightof entry into consciousness. We may express this by saying that what hashitherto been a preconscious train of thought has now been ‘drawn intothe unconscious.’
There are other conjunctures which may lead to the formation of a
dream. The preconscious train of thought may have been linked to the un-conscious wish from the ﬁrst and may for that reason have been repudiatedby the dominant purposive cathexis; or an unconscious wish may becomeactive for other reasons (from somatic causes, perhaps) and may seek to ef-fect a transference on to the psychical residues that are uncathected by thePcs. without their coming halfway to meet it. But all three cases have the
same ﬁnal outcome: a train of thought comes into being in the precon-scious which is without a preconscious cathexis but has received a cathexisfrom an unconscious wish.
From this point onwards the train of thought undergoes a series of
transformations which we can no longer recognize as normal psychicalprocesses and which lead to a result that bewilders us—a psychopatholog-ical structure. I will enumerate these processes and classify them.591 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 591(1) The intensities of the individual ideas become capable of discharge
en bloc and pass over from one idea to another, so that certain ideas are
formed which are endowed with great intensity. [Cf. pp. 345 f.] And sincethis process is repeated several times, the intensity of a whole train ofthought may eventually be concentrated in a single ideational element.Here we have the fact of ‘compression’ or ‘condensation,’ which has be-come familiar in the dream-work. It is this that is mainly responsible forthe bewildering impression made on us by dreams, for nothing at all anal-ogous to it is known to us in mental life that is normal and accessible toconsciousness. In normal mental life, too, we ﬁnd ideas which, being thenodal points or end-results of whole chains of thought, possess a high de-gree of psychical signiﬁcance; but their signiﬁcance is not expressed by anyfeature that is obvious in a sensory manner to internal perception; their per-
ceptual presentation is not in any respect more intense on account of theirpsychical signiﬁcance. In the process of condensation, on the other hand,every psychical interconnection is transformed into an intensiﬁcation of its
ideational content. The case is the same as when, in preparing a book forthe press, I have some word which is of special importance for understand-ing the text printed in spaced or heavy type; or in speech I should pro-nounce the same word loudly and slowly and with special emphasis. Theﬁrst of these two analogies reminds us at once of an example provided bythe dream-work itself: the word ‘trimethylamin’ in the dream of Irma’s in-
jection [p. 132]. Art historians have drawn our attention to the fact thatthe earliest historical sculptures obey a similar principle: they express therank of the persons represented by their size. A king is represented twiceor three times as large as his attendants or as his defeated enemies. A sculp-ture of Roman date would make use of subtler means for producing thesame result. The ﬁgure of the Emperor would be placed in the middle,standing erect, and would be modelled with especial care, while his ene-mies would be prostrate at his feet; but he would no longer be a giantamong dwarfs. The bows with which inferiors greet their superiors amongourselves today are an echo of the same ancient principle of representation.
The direction in which condensations in dreams proceed is determined
on the one hand by the rational preconscious relations of the dream-thoughts, and on the other by the attraction exercised by visual memoriesin the unconscious. The outcome of the activity of condensation is theachievement of the intensities required for forcing a way through into theperceptual systems.592 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 592(2) Owing, once more, to the freedom with which the intensities can
be transferred, ‘intermediate ideas,’ resembling compromises, are con-
structed under the sway of condensation. (Cf. the numerous instances Ihave given of this [e.g. pp. 310 ff.].) This is again something unheard-ofin normal chains of ideas, where the main stress is laid on the selectionand retention of the ‘right’ ideational element. On the other hand, com-posite structures and compromises occur with remarkable frequencywhen we try to express preconscious thoughts in speech. They are thenregarded as species of ‘slips of the tongue.’
(3) The ideas which transfer their intensities to each other stand in
the loosest mutual relations. They are linked by associations of a kindthat is scorned by our normal thinking and relegated to the use of jokes.In particular, we ﬁnd associations based on homonyms and verbal simi-larities treated as equal in value to the rest.
(4) Thoughts which are mutually contradictory make no attempt to
do away with each other, but persist side by side. They often combine toform condensations, just as though there were no contradiction betweenthem, or arrive at compromises such as our conscious thoughts wouldnever tolerate but such as are often admitted in our actions.
These are some of the most striking of the abnormal processes to
which the dream-thoughts, previously constructed on rational lines, aresubjected in the course of the dream-work. It will be seen that the chiefcharacteristic of these processes is that the whole stress is laid upon mak-ing the cathecting energy mobile and capable of discharge; the contentand the proper meaning of the psychical elements to which the cathexesare attached are treated as of little consequence. It might have been sup-posed that condensation and the formation of compromises is only car-ried out for the sake of facilitating regression, that is, when it is a questionof tranforming thoughts into images. But the analysis—and still more thesynthesis—of dreams which include no such regression to images, e.g. thedream of ‘Autodidasker’ [pp. 316 ff.], exhibits the same processes of dis-placement and condensation as the rest.
Thus we are driven to conclude that two fundamentally different
kinds of psychical process are concerned in the formation of dreams. Oneof these produces perfectly rational dream-thoughts, of no less validitythan normal thinking; while the other treats these thoughts in a mannerwhich is in the highest degree bewildering and irrational. We have already593 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 593in Chapter VI segregated this second psychical process as being the
dream-work proper. What light have we now to throw upon its origin?
It would not be possible for us to answer this question if we had not
made some headway in the study of the psychology of the neuroses, andparticularly of hysteria. We have found from this that the same irrationalpsychical processes, and others that we have not speciﬁed, dominate theproduction of hysterical symptoms. In hysteria, too, we come across a se-ries of perfectly rational thoughts, equal in validity to our consciousthoughts; but to begin with we know nothing of their existence in thisform and we can only reconstruct them subsequently. If they force them-selves upon our notice at any point, we discover by analysing the symp-tom which has been produced that these normal thoughts have beensubmitted to abnormal treatment: they have been transformed into the
symptom by means of condensation and the formation of compromises, by wayof superﬁcial associations and in disregard of contradictions, and also, it maybe, along the path of regression. In view of the complete identity between
the characteristic features of the dream-work and those of the psychicalactivity which issues in psychoneurotic symptoms, we feel justiﬁed in car-rying over to dreams the conclusions we have been led to by hysteria.
We accordingly borrow the following thesis from the theory of hyste-
ria: a normal train of thought is only submitted to abnormal psychical treat-
ment of the sort we have been describing if an unconscious wish, derived frominfancy and in a state of repression, has been transferred on to it. In accor-dance with this thesis we have constructed our theory of dreams on theassumption that the dream-wish which provides the motive power invari-ably originates from the unconscious—an assumption which, as I myselfam ready to admit, cannot be proved to hold generally, though neithercan it be disproved. But in order to explain what is meant by ‘repression,’a term with which we have already made play so many times, it is neces-sary to proceed a stage further with our psychological scaffolding.
We have already [pp. 564 ff.] explored the ﬁction of a primitive psychi-
cal apparatus whose activities are regulated by an effort to avoid an accu-mulation of excitation and to maintain itself so far as possible withoutexcitation. For that reason it is built upon the plan of a reﬂex apparatus.The power of movement, which is in the ﬁrst instance a means of bringingabout internal alterations in its body, is at its disposal as the path to dis-charge. We went on to discuss the psychical consequences of an ‘experienceof satisfaction’; and in that connection we were already able to add a sec-594 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 594ond hypothesis, to the effect that the accumulation of excitation (brought
about in various ways that need not concern us) is felt as unpleasure andthat it sets the apparatus in action with a view to repeating the experienceof satisfaction, which involved a diminution of excitation and was felt aspleasure. A current of this kind in the apparatus, starting from unpleasureand aiming at pleasure, we have termed a ‘wish’; and we have asserted thatonly a wish is able to set the apparatus in motion and that the course ofthe excitation in it is automatically regulated by feelings of pleasure andunpleasure. The ﬁrst wishing seems to have been a hallucinatory cathect-ing of the memory of satisfaction. Such hallucinations, however, if theywere not to be maintained to the point of exhaustion, proved to be inade-quate to bring about the cessation of the need or, accordingly, the pleasureattaching to satisfaction.
A second activity—or, as we put it, the activity of a second system—
became necessary, which would not allow the mnemic cathexis to proceedas far as perception and from there to bind the psychical forces; instead,it diverted the excitation arising from the need along a roundabout pathwhich ultimately, by means of voluntary movement, altered the externalworld in such a way that it became possible to arrive at a real perceptionof the object of satisfaction. We have already outlined our schematic pic-ture of the psychical apparatus up to this point; the two systems are thegerm of what, in the fully developed apparatus, we have described as theUcs. and Pcs.
In order to be able to employ the power of movement to make alter-
ations in the external world that shall be effective, it is necessary to accu-mulate a great number of experiences in the mnemic systems and amultiplicity of permanent records of the associations called up in this mne-mic material by different purposive ideas. [Cf. p. 541.] We can now carryour hypotheses a step further. The activity of this second system, con-stantly feeling its way, and alternately sending out and withdrawing ca -thexes, needs on the one hand to have the whole of the material of memoryfreely at its command; but on the other hand it would be an unnecessaryexpenditure of energy if it sent out large quantities of cathexis along thevarious paths of thought and thus caused them to dream away to no usefulpurpose and diminish the quantity available for altering the external world.I therefore postulate that for the sake of efﬁciency the second system suc-ceeds in retaining the major part of its cathexes of energy in a state of quiescence and in employing only a small part on displacement. The me-chanics of these processes are quite unknown to me; anyone who wished595 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 595to take these ideas seriously would have to look for physical analogies to
them and ﬁnd a means of picturing the movements that accompany exci-tation of neurones. All that I insist upon is the idea that the activity of theﬁrst ψ-system is directed towards securing the free discharge of the quanti-
ties of excitation, while the second system, by means of the cathexes ema-
nating from it, succeeds in inhibiting this discharge and in transforming
the cathexis into a quiescent one, no doubt with a simultaneous raising ofits potential. I presume, therefore, that under the dominion of the secondsystem the discharge of excitation is governed by quite different mechanicalconditions from those in force under the dominion of the ﬁrst system.When once the second system has concluded its exploratory thought- activity, it releases the inhibition and damming-up of the excitations andallows them to discharge themselves in movement.
Some interesting reﬂections follow if we consider the relations between
this inhibition upon discharge exercised by the second system and the regu-lation effected by the unpleasure principle.
1Let us examine the antithesis to
the primary experience of satisfaction—namely, the experience of an externalfright. Let us suppose that the primitive apparatus is impinged upon by aperceptual stimulus which is a source of painful excitation. Unco- ordinatedmotor manifestations will follow until one of them withdraws the apparatusfrom the perception and at the same time from the pain. If the perceptionre-appears, the movement will at once be repeated (a movement of ﬂight, itmay be) till the perception has disappeared once more. In this case, no incli-nation will remain to recathect the perception of the source of pain, eitherhallucinatorily or in any other way. On the contrary, there will be an incli-nation in the primitive apparatus to drop the distressing memory-pictureimmediately, if anything happens to revive it, for the very reason that if itsexcitation were to overﬂow into perception it would provoke unpleasure (or,more precisely, would begin to provoke it). The avoidance of the memory,
which is no more than a repetition of the previous ﬂight from the percep-tion, is also facilitated by the fact that the memory, unlike the perception,does not possess enough quality to excite consciousness and thus to attractfresh cathexis to itself. This effortless and regular avoidance by the psychicalprocess of the memory of anything that had once been distressing affords usthe prototype and ﬁrst example of psychical repression. It is a familiar fact that
much of this avoidance of what is distressing—this ostrich  policy—is still tobe seen in the normal mental life of adults.596 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [In his later works Freud speaks of it as the ‘pleasure principle.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 596As a result of the unpleasure principle, then, the ﬁrst ψ -system is totally
incapable of bringing anything disagreeable into the context of its thought.
It is unable to do anything but wish. If things remained at that point, thethought-activity of the second system would be obstructed, since it requiresfree access to all the memories laid down by experience. T wo possibilities
now present themselves. Either the activity of the second system might setitself entirely free from the unpleasure principle and proceed without trou-bling about the unpleasure of memories; or it might ﬁnd a method ofcathecting unpleasurable memories which would enable it to avoid releas-ing the unpleasure. We may dismiss the ﬁrst of these possibilities, for theunpleasure principle clearly regulates the course of excitation in the secondsystem as much as in the ﬁrst. We are consequently left with the remainingpossibility that the second system cathects memories in such a way thatthere is an inhibition of their discharge, including, therefore, an inhibitionof discharge (comparable to that of a motor innervation) in the directionof the development of unpleasure. We have therefore been led from two di-rections to the hypothesis that cathexis by the second system implies a si-multaneous inhibition of the discharge of excitations: we have been led toit by regard for the unpleasure principle and also [as was shown in the lastparagraph but one] by the principle of the least expenditure of innervation.Let us bear this ﬁrmly in mind, for it is the key to the whole theory of re-pression: the second system can only cathect an idea if it is in a position to in-
hibit any development of unpleasure that may proceed from it. Anything that
could evade that inhibition would be inaccessible to the second system aswell as to the ﬁrst; for it would promptly be dropped in obedience to theunpleasure principle. The inhibition of unpleasure need not, however, be acomplete one: a beginning of it must be allowed, since that is what informsthe second system of the nature of the memory concerned and of its possi-ble unsuitability for the purpose which the thought-process has in view.
I propose to describe the psychical process of which the ﬁrst system
alone admits the ‘primary process,’ and the process which results from theinhibition imposed by the second system as the ‘secondary process.’
1597 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes
1 [The distinction between the primary and secondary systems, and the hypothe-
sis that psychical functioning operates differently in them, are among the most
fundamental of Freud’s concepts. They are associated with the theory (indicatedon pp. 595 f. and at the opening of the next Section) that psychical energy oc-curs in two forms: ‘free’ or ‘mobile’ (as it occurs in the system Ucs. ) and ‘bound’
or ‘quiescent’ (as it occurs in the system Pcs. ). Where Freud discusses this subject9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 597There is yet another reason for which, as I can show, the second sys-
tem is obliged to correct the primary process. The primary process en-
deavours to bring about a discharge of excitation in order that, with thehelp of the amount of excitation thus accumulated, it may establish a‘perceptual identity’ [with the experience of satisfaction (see pp. 564–5)].The secondary process, however, has abandoned this intention and takenon another in its place—the establishment of a ‘thought identity’ [with
that experience]. All thinking is no more than a circuitous path from thememory of a satisfaction (a memory which has been adopted as a purpo-sive idea) to an identical cathexis of the same memory which it is hopedto attain once more through an intermediate stage of motor experiences.Thinking must concern itself with the connecting paths between ideas,without being led astray by the intensities of those ideas. But it is obvious
that condensations of ideas, as well as intermediate and compromisestructures, must obstruct the attainment of the identity aimed at. Sincethey substitute one idea for another, they cause a deviation from the pathwhich would have led on from the ﬁrst idea. Processes of this kind aretherefore scrupulously avoided in secondary thinking. It is easy to see,too, that the unpleasure principle, which in other respects supplies thethought-process with its most important signposts, puts difﬁculties in itspath towards establishing ‘thought identity.’ Accordingly, thinking mustaim at freeing itself more and more from exclusive regulation by the un-pleasure principle and at restricting the development of affect in thought-activity to the minimum required for acting as a signal.
1The achievement598 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
in his later writings (e.g. in his paper on ‘The Unconscious,’ 1915e , end of Sec-
tion V, and in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 1920g, Chapter IV) he attributes this
latter distinction to some statement of Breuer’s in their joint Studies on Hysteria
(1895). There is some difﬁculty in identifying any such statement in Brevier’s
contribution to that work (Chapter III). The nearest approach to it is a footnotenear the beginning of Section 2, in which Breuer distinguishes three forms of ner-
vous energy: ‘a potential energy which rests in the chemical substance of the cell,’‘a kinetic energy which is discharged when the ﬁbres are in a state of excitation’and ‘yet another quiescent state of nervous excitation: tonic excitation or nervoustension.’ On the other hand, the question of ‘bound’ energy is discussed at somelength towards the end of the ﬁrst section of Part III of Freud’s ‘Project’ (1950 a),
written only a few months after the publication of the Studies on Hysteria. ]
1 [This idea of a small amount of unpleasure acting as a ‘signal’ to prevent the oc-
currence of a much larger amount was taken up by Freud many years later andapplied to the problem of anxiety. See Freud, 1926d , Chapter XI, Section A(b).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 598of this greater delicacy in functioning is aimed at by means of a further
hypercathexis, brought about by consciousness. [See below, pp. 610 ff.]As we well know, however, that aim is seldom attained completely, evenin normal mental life, and our thinking always remains exposed to falsi-ﬁcation by interference from the unpleasure principle.
This, however, is not the gap in the functional efﬁciency of our mental
apparatus which makes it possible for thoughts, which represent them-selves as products of the secondary thought-activity, to become subject tothe primary psychical process—for such is the formula in which we cannow describe the activity which leads to dreams and to hysterical symp-toms. Inefﬁciency arises from the convergence of two factors derived fromour developmental history. One of these factors devolves entirely uponthe mental apparatus and has had a decisive inﬂuence on the relation be-tween the two systems, while the other makes itself felt to a variable de-gree and introduces instinctual forces of organic origin into mental life.Both of them originate in childhood and are a precipitate of the modiﬁ-cations undergone by our mental and somatic organism since our infancy.
When I described one of the psychical processes occurring in the men-
tal apparatus as the ‘primary’ one, what I had in mind was not merely con-siderations of relative importance and efﬁciency; I intended also to choosea name which would give an indication of its chronological priority. It istrue that, so far as we know, no psychical apparatus exists which possessesa primary process only and that such an apparatus is to that extent a theo-retical ﬁction. But this much is a fact: the primary processes are present inthe mental apparatus from the ﬁrst, while it is only during the course oflife that the secondary processes unfold, and come to inhibit and overlaythe primary ones; it may even be that their complete domination is not at-tained until the prime of life. In consequence of the belated appearance ofthe secondary processes, the core of our being, consisting of unconsciouswishful impulses, remains inaccessible to the understanding and inhibitionof the preconscious; the part played by the latter is restricted once and forall to directing along the most expedient paths the wishful impulses thatarise from the unconscious. These unconscious wishes exercise a com-pelling force upon all later mental trends, a force which those trends areobliged to fall in with or which they may perhaps endeavour to divert anddirect to higher aims. A further result of the belated appearance of the sec-ondary process is that a wide sphere of mnemic material is inaccessible topreconscious cathexis.599 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 599Among these wishful impulses derived from infancy, which can nei-
ther be destroyed nor inhibited, there are some whose fulﬁlment would
be a contradiction of the purposive ideas of secondary thinking. The ful-ﬁlment of these wishes would no longer generate an affect of pleasure butof unpleasure; and it is precisely this transformation of affect which consti-
tutes the essence of what we term ‘repression. ’ The problem of repression lies
in the question of how it is and owing to what motive forces that thistransformation occurs; but it is a problem that we need only touch uponhere.
1It is enough for us to be clear that a transformation of this kind
does occur in the course of development—we have only to recall the wayin which disgust emerges in childhood after having been absent to beginwith—and that it is related to the activity of the secondary system. Thememories on the basis of which the unconscious wish brings about therelease of affect were never accessible to the Pcs., and consequently the re-
lease of the affect attaching to those memories cannot be inhibited either.It is for the very reason of this generation of affect that these ideas are nowinaccessible even by way of the preconscious thoughts on to which theyhave transferred their wishful force. On the contrary, the unpleasure prin-ciple takes control and causes the Pcs. to turn away from the transference
thought. They are left to themselves—‘repressed’—and thus it is that thepresence of a store of infantile memories, which has from the ﬁrst beenheld back from the Pcs., becomes a sine qua non of repression.
In the most favourable cases the generation of unpleasure ceases along
with the withdrawal of cathexis from the transference thoughts in the Pcs.;
and this outcome signiﬁes that the intervention of the unpleasure principlehas served a useful purpose. But it is another matter when the repressedunconscious wish receives an organic reinforcement, which it passes on toits transference thoughts; in that way it may place them in a position tomake an attempt at forcing their way through with their excitation, evenif they have lost their cathexis from the Pcs. There then follows a defensive
struggle—for the Pcs. in turn reinforces its opposition to the repressed
thoughts (i.e. produces an ‘anticathexis’)—and thereafter the transferencethoughts, which are the vehicles of the unconscious wish, force their waythrough in some form of compromise which is reached by the productionof a symptom. But from the moment at which the repressed thoughts are600 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [The subject was afterwards dealt with by Freud at much greater length in his
paper on ‘Repression’ (1915 d); his later views on the subject are given in Lecture
XXXII of his New Introductory Lectures (1933a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 600strongly cathected by the unconscious wishful impulse and, on the other
hand, abandoned by the preconscious cathexis, they become subject to theprimary psychical process and their one aim is motor discharge or, ifthe path is open, hallucinatory revival of the desired perceptual identity.We have already found empirically that the irrational processes we have described are only carried out with thoughts that are under repression. Wecan now see our way a little further into the whole position. The irrationalprocesses which occur in the psychical apparatus are the primary ones.
They appear wherever ideas are abandoned by the preconscious cathexis,are left to themselves and can become charged with the uninhibited energyfrom the unconscious which is striving to ﬁnd an outlet. Some other observations lend support to the view that these processes which are de-scribed as irrational are not in fact falsiﬁcations of normal processes— intellectual errors—but are modes of activity of the psychical apparatusthat have been freed from an inhibition. Thus we ﬁnd that the transitionfrom preconscious excitation to movement is governed by the same pro-cesses, and that the linking of preconscious ideas to words may easily ex-hibit the same displacements and confusions, which are then attributed toinattention. Evidence, ﬁnally, of the increase in activity which becomesnecessary when these primary modes of functioning are inhibited is to befound in the fact that we produce a comic effect, that is, a surplus of energy
which has to be discharged in laughter, if we allow these modes of thinking
to force their way through into consciousness.
1
The theory of the psychoneuroses asserts as an indisputable and invari-
able fact that only sexual wishful impulses from infancy, which have un-dergone repression (i.e. a transformation of their affect) during thedevelopmental period of childhood, are capable of being revived duringlater developmental periods (whether as a result of the subject’s sexual
constitution, which is derived from an initial bisexuality, or as a result ofunfavourable inﬂuences acting upon the course of his sexual life) and arethus able to furnish the motive force for the formation of psychoneuroticsymptoms of every kind.
2It is only by reference to these sexual forces that
we can close the gaps that are still patent in the theory of repression. I will601 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes
1 [This topic was dealt with by Freud at greater length in Chapter V of his book
on jokes (1905 c). The question of intellectual errors was discussed more fully in
the closing pages of the ‘Project’ (1950 a).]
2 The theme of this sentence was elaborated by Freud in his Three Essays on the
Theory of Sexuality (1905d ).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 601leave it an open question whether these sexual and infantile factors are
equally required in the theory of dreams : I will leave that theory incom-plete at this point, since I have already gone a step beyond what can bedemonstrated in assuming that dream-wishes are invariably derived fromthe unconscious.
1Nor do I propose to enquire further into the nature of
the distinction between the play of psychical forces in the formation ofdreams and in that of hysterical symptoms: we are still without a sufﬁ-ciently accurate knowledge of one of the two objects of the comparison.
There is, however, another point to which I attach importance; and I
must confess that it is solely on its account that I have embarked here602 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 Here and elsewhere I have intentionally left gaps in the treatment of my theme
because to ﬁll them would on the one hand require too great an effort and on
the other would involve my basing myself on material that is alien to the subjectof dreams. For instance, I have omitted to state whether I attribute differentmeanings to the words ‘suppressed’ and ‘repressed.’ It should have been clear,however, that the latter lays more stress than the former upon the fact of attach-ment to the unconscious. Nor have I entered into the obvious problem of whythe dream-thoughts are subjected to distortion by the censorship even in caseswhere they have abandoned the progressive path towards consciousness and havechosen the regressive one. And there are many similar omissions. What I wasabove all anxious to do was to create an impression of the problems to which afurther analysis of the dream-work must lead and to give a hint of the other top-ics with which that further analysis would come into contact. It has not alwaysbeen easy for me to decide the point at which to break off my pursuit of this lineof exposition.—There are special reasons, which may not be what my readers ex-pect, why I have not given any exhaustive treatment to the part played in dreamsby the world of sexual ideas and why I have avoided analysing dreams of obvi-ously sexual content. Nothing could be further from my own views or from thetheoretical opinions which I hold in neuropathology than to regard sexual life assomething shameful, with which neither a physician nor a scientiﬁc researchworker has any concern. Moreover, the moral indignation by which the transla-tor of the Oneirocritica of Artemidorus of Daldis allowed himself to be led into
withholding the chapter on sexual dreams from the knowledge of his readersstrikes me as laughable. What governed my decision was simply my seeing thatan explanation of sexual dreams would involve me deeply in the still unsolvedproblems of perversion and bisexuality; and I accordingly reserved this materialfor another occasion. [It should perhaps be added that the translator of Oneiro-
critica, F . S. Krauss, himself subsequently published the omitted chapter in his
periodical Anthropophyteia, from which Freud has quoted above (p. 368 n.)a n d
of which he speaks so highly elsewhere (1910 fand 1913k ).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 602upon all these discussions of the two psychical systems and their modes of
activity and of repression. It is not now a question of whether I haveformed an approximately correct opinion of the psychological factors withwhich we are concerned, or whether, which is quite possible in such difﬁ-cult matters, my picture of them is distorted and incomplete. Howevermany changes may be made in our reading of the psychical censorship andof the rational and abnormal revisions made of the dream-content, it re-mains true that processes of this sort are at work in the formation ofdreams and that they show the closest analogy in their essentials to theprocesses observable in the formation of hysterical symptoms. A dream,however, is no pathological phenomenon; it presupposes no disturbanceof psychical equilibrium; it leaves behind it no loss of efﬁciency. The sug-gestion may be made that no conclusions as to the dreams of normalpeople can be drawn from my dreams or those of my patients; but this, Ithink, is an objection which can be safely disregarded. If, then, we may ar-gue back from the phenomena to their motive forces, we must recognizethat the psychical mechanism employed by neuroses is not created by theimpact of a pathological disturbance upon the mind but is present alreadyin the normal structure of the mental apparatus. The two psychical sys-tems, the censorship upon the passage from one of them to the other, theinhibition and overlaying of one activity by the other, the relations of bothof them to consciousness—or whatever more correct interpretations of theobserved facts may take their place—all of these form part of the normalstructure of our mental instrument, and dreams show us one of the pathsleading to an understanding of its structure. If we restrict ourselves to theminimum of new knowledge which has been established with certainty, wecan still say this of dreams: they have proved that what is suppressed contin-ues to exist in normal people as well as abnormal, arid remains capable of psy-chical functioning. Dreams themselves are among the manifestations of this
suppressed material; this is so theoretically in every case, and it can be ob-served empirically in a great number of cases at least, and precisely in caseswhich exhibit most clearly the striking peculiarities of dream-life. In wak-ing life the suppressed material in the mind is prevented from ﬁnding ex-pression and is cut off from internal perception owing to the fact that thecontradictions present in it are eliminated—one side being disposed of infavour of the other; but during the night, under the sway of an impetustowards the construction of compromises, this suppressed material ﬁndsmethods and means of forcing its way into consciousness.603 E. The Primary and Secondary Processes9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 603Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.1
The interpretation of dreams is the royal road to a knowledge of the un-
conscious activities of the mind.
By analysing dreams we can take a step forward in our understanding
of the composition of that most marvellous and most mysterious of all in-
struments. Only a small step, no doubt; but a beginning. And this begin-ning will enable us to proceed further with its analysis, on the basis ofother structures which must be termed pathological. For illnesses—those,at least, which are rightly named ‘functional’—do not presuppose the dis-integration of the apparatus or the production of fresh splits in its interior.They are to be explained on a dynamic basis—by the strengthening and
weakening of the various components in the interplay of forces, so manyof whose effects are hidden from view while functions are normal. I hopeto be able to show elsewhere how the compounding of the apparatus outof two agencies makes it possible for the normal mind too to function withgreater delicacy than would be possible with only one of them.
2604 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [‘If I cannot bend the Higher Powers, I will move the Infernal Regions.’ Freud
remarks in a note in Ges. Schr., 3(1925), 169, that this line of Virgil [ Aeneid,
VII, 312] is intended to picture the efforts of the repressed instinctual impulses.’
He has used the same line as the motto for the whole volume. In a letter to Fliessof December 4, 1896 (Freud, 1950a, Letter 51) he proposed using it as a mottofor a chapter on ‘Symptom Formation’ in some projected but unrealizedwork.—The next sentence was added in 1909. It was included in the same yearin the third of his lectures at Clark University (Freud, 1910 a).]
2 Dreams are not the only phenomena which allow us to ﬁnd a basis for psy-
chopathology in psychology. In a short series of papers (1898b and 1899a )
which is not yet completed, I have attempted to interpret a number of phenom-ena of daily life as evidence in favour of the same conclusions. [ Added 1909:]
These, together with some further papers on forgetting, slips of the tongue, bun-gled actions, etc., have since been collected under the title of The Psychopathology
of Everyday Life (Freud, 1901b).9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 604(F)
THE UNCONSCIOUS AND CONSCIOUSNESS—
REALITY
It will be seen on closer consideration that what the psychological discus-
sion in the preceding sections invites us to assume is not the existence of two
systems near the motor end of the apparatus but the existence of two kinds
of processes of excitation or modes of its discharge. It is all one to us, for we must
always be prepared to drop our conceptual scaffolding if we feel that we arein a position to replace it by something that approximates more closely tothe unknown reality. So let us try to correct some conceptions which mightbe misleading so long as we looked upon the two systems in the most literaland crudest sense as two localities in the mental apparatus—conceptionswhich have left their traces in the expressions ‘to repress’ and ‘to force a waythrough.’ Thus, we may speak of an unconscious thought seeking to conveyitself into the preconscious so as to be able then to force its way through intoconsciousness. What we have in mind here is not the forming of a secondthought situated in a new place, like a transcription which continues to existalongside the original; and the notion of forcing a way through into con-sciousness must be kept carefully free from any idea of a change of locality.Again, we may speak of a preconscious thought being repressed or drivenout and then taken over by the unconscious. These images, derived from aset of ideas relating to a struggle for a piece of ground, may tempt us to sup-pose that it is literally true that a mental grouping in one locality has beenbrought to an end and replaced by a fresh one in another locality. Let us re-place these metaphors by something that seems to correspond better to thereal state of affairs, and let us say instead that some particular mental group-ing has had a cathexis of energy attached to it or withdrawn from it, so thatthe structure in question has come under the sway of a particular agency orbeen withdrawn from it. What we are doing here is once again to replace atopographical way of representing things by a dynamic one. What we regardas mobile is not the psychical structure itself but its innervation.
1605 F . The Unconscious and Consciousness
1 [Footnote added 1925:] It became necessary to elaborate and modify this view af-
ter it was recognized that the essential feature of a preconscious idea was the fact9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 605Nevertheless, I consider it expedient and justiﬁable to continue to
make use of the ﬁgurative image of the two systems. We can avoid any
possible abuse of this method of representation by recollecting that ideas,thoughts and psychical structures in general must never be regarded as lo-calized in organic elements of the nervous system but rather, as one mightsay, between them, where resistances and facilitations [ Bahnungen] provide
the corresponding correlates. Everything that can be an object of our in-ternal perception is virtual, like the image produced in a telescope by the
passage of light-rays. But we are justiﬁed in assuming the existence of thesystems (which are not in any way psychical entities themselves and cannever be accessible to our psychical perception) like the lenses of the tele-scope, which cast the image. And, if we pursue this analogy, we may com-pare the censorship between two systems to the refraction which takesplace when a ray of light passes into a new medium.
So far we have been psychologizing on our own account. It is time now
to consider the theoretical views which govern present-day psychology andto examine their relation to our hypotheses. The problem of the uncon-scious in psychology is, in the forcible words of Lipps (1897), less a psy-
chological problem than the problem of psychology. So long as psychology
dealt with this problem by a verbal explanation to the effect that ‘psychical’meant ‘conscious’ and that to speak of ‘unconscious psychical processes’
was palpable nonsense, any psychological evaluation of the observationsmade by physicians upon abnormal mental states was out of the question.The physician and the philosopher can only come together if they bothrecognize that the term ‘unconscious psychical processes’ is ‘the appropriateand justiﬁed expression of a solidly established fact.’ The physician canonly shrug his shoulders when he is assured that ‘consciousness is an indis-pensable characteristic of what is psychical,’ and perhaps, if he still feelsenough respect for the utterances of philosophers, he may presume thatthey have not been dealing with the same thing or working at the same science. For even a single understanding observation of a neurotic’s mentallife or a single analysis of a dream must leave him with an unshakable con-viction that the most complicated and most rational thought-processes,606 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
of its being connected with the residues of verbal presentations. Cf. ‘The Un-
conscious’ (1915 e, [Section VII]). [As is there pointed out, however, this was al-
ready indicated in the ﬁrst edition of the present work. (See pp. 573 and612.)—For the use of the word ‘innervation’ cf. p. 539 n.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 606which can surely not be denied the name of psychical processes, can occur
without exciting the subject’s consciousness.1It is true that the physician
cannot learn of these unconscious processes until they have produced someeffect upon consciousness which can be communicated or observed. Butthis conscious effect may exhibit a psychical character quite different fromthat of the unconscious process, so that internal perception cannot possiblyregard the one as a substitute for the other. The physician must feel at lib-erty to proceed by inference from the conscious effect to the unconscious
psychical process. He thus learns that the conscious effect is only a remotepsychical result of the unconscious process and that the latter has not be-come conscious as such; and moreover that the latter was present and op-erative even without betraying its existence in any way to consciousness.
It is essential to abandon the overvaluation of the property of being con-
scious before it becomes possible to form any correct view of the origin ofwhat is mental. In Lipps’s words [1897, 146 f.], the unconscious must be as-sumed to be the general basis of psychical life. The unconscious is the largersphere, which includes within it the smaller sphere of the conscious. Every-thing conscious has an unconscious preliminary stage; whereas what is un-conscious may remain at that stage and nevertheless claim to be regarded ashaving the full value of a psychical process. The unconscious is the true psy-chical reality; in its innermost nature it is as much unknown to us as the reality
of the external world, and it is as incompletely presented by the data of conscious-ness as is the external world by the communications of our sense organs.
Now that the old antithesis between conscious life and dream-life has
been reduced to its proper proportions by the establishment of uncon-scious psychical reality, a number of dream-problems with which earlierwriters were deeply concerned have lost their signiﬁcance. Thus some ofthe activities whose successful performance in dreams excited astonishmentare now no longer to be attributed to dreams but to unconscious thinking,607 F . The Unconscious and Consciousness
1 [Footnote added 1914:] I am happy to be able to point to an author who has
drawn from the study of dreams the same conclusions as I have on the relation
between conscious and unconscious activity. Du Prel (1885, 47) writes: ‘Theproblem of the nature of the mind evidently calls for a preliminary investigationas to whether consciousness and mind are identical. This preliminary question isanswered in the negative by dreams, which show that the concept of the mind isa wider one than that of consciousness, in the same kind of way in which thegravitational force of a heavenly body extends beyond its range of luminosity.’And again (ibid., 306 [quoting Maudsley, 1868, 15]): ‘It is a truth which cannotbe too distinctly borne in mind that consciousness is not co-extensive with mind.’9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 607which is active during the day no less than at night. If, as Schemer [1861,
114 f.] has said, dreams appear to engage in making symbolic representa-tions of the body [p. 111], we now know that those representations are theproduct of certain unconscious phantasies (deriving, probably, from sexualimpulses) which ﬁnd expression not only in dreams but also in hystericalphobias and other symptoms. If a dream carries on the activities of the dayand completes them and even brings valuable fresh ideas to light, all weneed do is to strip it of the dream disguise, which is the product of dream-work and the mark of assistance rendered by obscure forces from thedepths of the mind (cf. the Devil in Tartini’s sonata dream);
1the intellec-
tual achievement is due to the same mental forces which produce everysimilar result during the daytime. We are probably inclined greatly to over-estimate the conscious character of intellectual and artistic production aswell. Accounts given us by some of the most highly productive men, suchas Goethe and Helmholtz, show rather that what is essential and new intheir creations came to them without premeditation and as an almostready-made whole. There is nothing strange if in other cases, where a con-centration of every intellectual faculty was needed, conscious activity alsocontributed its share. But it is the much-abused privilege of conscious ac-tivity, wherever it plays a part, to conceal every other activity from our eyes.
It would scarcely repay the trouble if we were to treat the historical
 signiﬁcance of dreams as a separate topic. A dream may have impelled somechieftain to embark upon a bold enterprise the success of which haschanged history. But this only raises a fresh problem so long as a dream isregarded as an alien power in contrast to the other more familiar forces ofthe mind; no such problem remains if a dream is recognized as a form of ex-
pression of impulses which are under the pressure of resistance during the
day but which have been able to ﬁnd reinforcement during the night fromdeep-lying sources of excitation.
2The respect paid to dreams in antiquity
is, however, based upon correct psychological insight and is the homage608 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Tartini, the composer and violinist (1692–1770), is said to have dreamt that he
sold his soul to the devil, who thereupon seized a violin and played a sonata of
exquisite beauty upon it with consummate skill. When the composer awoke heat once wrote down what he could recollect of it, and the result was his famous‘T rillo del Diavolo.’]
2 [Footnote added 1911:] Cf. in this connection Alexander the Great’s dream dur-
ing his siege of Tyre (σ /H11032α-τυρος). [See p. 131 n. 2.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 608paid to the uncontrolled and indestructible forces in the human mind, to
the ‘daemonic’ power which produces the dream-wish and which we ﬁndat work in our unconscious.
It is not without intention that I speak of ‘our’ unconscious. For what I
thus describe is not the same as the unconscious of the philosophers or eventhe unconscious of Lipps. By them the term is used merely to indicate a con-trast with the conscious: the thesis which they dispute with so much heatand defend with so much energy is the thesis that apart from conscious thereare also unconscious psychical processes. Lipps carries things further with hisassertion that the whole of what is psychical exists unconsciously and that apart of it also exists consciously. But it is not in order to establish this thesis
that we have summoned up the phenomena of dreams and of the formationof hysterical symptoms; the observation of normal waking life would by it-self sufﬁce to prove it beyond any doubt. The new discovery that we havebeen taught by the analysis of psychopathological structures and of the ﬁrstmember of that class—the dream—lies in the fact that the unconscious (thatis, the psychical) is found as a function of two separate systems and that thisis the case in normal as well as in pathological life. Thus there are two kindsof unconscious, which have not yet been distinguished by psychologists.Both of them are unconscious in the sense used by psychology; but in oursense one of them, which we term the Ucs., is also inadmissible to conscious-
ness, while we term the other the Pcs. because its excitations—after observing
certain rules, it is true, and perhaps only after passing a fresh censorship,though nonetheless without regard to the Ucs.—are able to reach conscious-
ness. The fact that excitations in order to reach consciousness must passthrough a ﬁxed series or hierarchy of agencies (which is revealed to us by themodiﬁcations made in them by censorship) has enabled us to construct aspatial analogy. We have described the relations of the two systems to eachother and to consciousness by saying that the system Pcs. stands like a screen
between the system Ucs. and consciousness. The system Pcs. not merely bars
access to consciousness, it also controls access to the power of voluntarymovement and has at its disposal for distribution a mobile cathectic energy,a part of which is familiar to us in the form of attention.
1[See p. 598.]609 F . The Unconscious and Consciousness
1 [Footnote added 1914:] Cf. my ‘Remarks on the Concept of the Unconscious in
Psycho-Analysis’ (Freud, 1912 g), ﬁrst published in English in the Proceedings of
the Society for Psychical Research, 26[312], in which I have distinguished the
descriptive, dynamic and systematic meanings of the highly ambiguous word
‘unconscious.’ [The whole topic is discussed in the light of Freud’s later views inChapter II of The Ego and the Id (1923b).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 609We must avoid, too, the distinction between ‘supraconscious’ and
‘subconscious,’ which has become so popular in the more recent literature
of the psychoneuroses, for such a distinction seems precisely calculated tostress the equivalence of what is psychical to what is conscious.
But what part is there left to be played in our scheme by conscious-
ness, which was once so omnipotent and hid all else from view? Only that
of a sense-organ for the preception of psychical qualities.
1In accordance with
the ideas underlying our attempt at a schematic picture, we can only re-gard conscious perception as the function proper to a particular system;and for this the abbreviation Cs. seems appropriate. In its mechanical
properties we regard this system as resembling the perceptual systemsPcpt.: as being susceptible to excitation by qualities but incapable of re-
taining traces of alterations—that is to say, as having no memory. Thepsychical apparatus, which is turned towards the external world with itssense-organ of the Pcpt. systems, is itself the external world in relation to
the sense-organ of the Cs., whose teleological justiﬁcation resides in this
circumstance. Here we once more meet the principle of the hierarchy ofagencies, which seems to govern the structure of the apparatus. Excitatorymaterial ﬂows in to the Cs. sense-organ from two directions: from the
Pcpt. system, whose excitation, determined by qualities, is probably sub-
mitted to a fresh revision before it becomes a conscious sensation, andfrom the interior of the apparatus itself, whose quantitative processes arefelt qualitatively in the pleasure-unpleasure series when, subject to certainmodiﬁcations, they make their way to consciousness.
Those philosophers who have become aware that rational and highly
complex thought-structures are possible without consciousness playing anypart in them have found difﬁculty in assigning any function to conscious-ness; it has seemed to them that it can be no more than a superﬂuous re-ﬂected picture of the completed psychical process. We, on the other hand,are rescued from this embarrassment by the analogy between our Cs. sys-
tem and the perceptual systems. We know that perception by our sense- organs has the result of directing a cathexis of attention to the paths alongwhich the in-coming sensory excitation is spreading: the qualitative excita-tion of the Pcpt. system acts as a regulator of the discharge of the mobile610 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [Freud’s use of the terms ‘quantity’ and ‘quality’ is fully explained in Part I of
his ‘Project’ (1950 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 610quantity in the psychical apparatus. We can attribute the same function to
the overlying sense-organ of the Cs. system. By perceiving new qualities, it
makes a new contribution to directing the mobile quantities of cathexisand distributing them in an expedient fashion. By the help of its percep-tion of pleasure and unpleasure it inﬂuences the discharge of the cathexeswithin what is otherwise an unconscious apparatus operating by means ofthe displacement of quantities. It seems probable that in the ﬁrst instancethe unpleasure principle regulates the displacement of cathexes automati-cally. But it is quite possible that consciousness of these qualities may in-troduce in addition a second and more discriminating regulation, which iseven able to oppose the former one, and which perfects the efﬁciency ofthe apparatus by enabling it, in contradiction to its original plan, to cathectand work over what is associated with the release of unpleasure. We learnfrom the psychology of the neuroses that these processes of regulation car-ried out by the qualitative excitation of the sense organs play a great partin the functional activity of the apparatus. The automatic domination ofthe primary unpleasure principle and the consequent restriction imposedupon efﬁciency are interrupted by the processes of sensory regulation,which are themselves in turn automatic in action. We ﬁnd that repression(which, though it served a useful purpose to begin with, leads ultimatelyto a damaging loss of inhibition and mental control) affects memories somuch more easily than perceptions because the former can receive no extracathexis from the excitation of the psychical sense organs. It is true on theone hand that a thought which has to be warded off cannot become con-scious, because it has undergone repression; but on the other hand it some-times happens that a thought of this kind is only repressed because forother reasons it has been withdrawn from conscious perception. Here aresome hints of which we take advantage in our therapeutic procedure in or-der to undo repressions which have already been effected.
The value of the hypercathexis which is set up in the mobile quantities
by the regulating inﬂuence of the sense organ of the Cs. cannot be better
illustrated in its teleological aspect than by the fact of its creation of a newseries of qualities and consequently of a new process of regulation whichconstitutes the superiority of men over animals. Thought-processes are inthemselves without quality, except for the pleasurable and unpleasurableexcitations which accompany them, and which, in view of their possibledisturbing effect upon thinking, must be kept within bounds. In orderthat thought-processes may acquire quality, they are associated in humanbeings with verbal memories, whose residues of quality are sufﬁcient to611 F . The Unconscious and Consciousness9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 611draw the attention of consciousness to them and to endow the process of
thinking with a new mobile cathexis from consciousness. [Cf. pp. 573and 605 n.]
The whole multiplicity of the problems of consciousness can only be
grasped by an analysis of the thought-processes in hysteria. These give onethe impression that the transition from a preconscious to a consciouscathexis is marked by a censorship similar to that between the Ucs. and the
Pcs.
1This censorship, too, only comes into force above a certain quan -
titative limit, so that thought-structures of low intensity escape it. Exam-ples of every possible variety of how a thought can be withheld fromconsciousness or can force its way into consciousness under certain limita-tions are to be found included within the framework of psychoneuroticphenomena; and they all point to the intimate and reciprocal relations be-tween censorship and consciousness. I will bring these psychological reﬂec-tions to an end with a report of two such examples.
I was called in to a consultation last year to examine an intelligent and
unembarrassed-looking girl. She was most surprisingly dressed. For thoughas a rule a woman’s clothes are carefully considered down to the last detail,she was wearing one of her stockings hanging down and two of the buttonson her blouse were undone. She complained of having pains in her leg and,without being asked, exposed her calf. But what she principally complainedof was, to use her own words, that she had a feeling in her body as thoughthere was something ‘stuck into it’ which was ‘moving backwards and for-wards’ and was ‘shaking’ her through and through: sometimes it made herwhole body feel ‘stiff.’ My medical colleague, who was present at the exam-ination, looked at me; he found no difﬁculty in understanding the meaningof her complaint. But what struck both of us as extraordinary was the factthat it meant nothing to the patient’s mother—though she must often havefound herself in the situation which her child was describing. The girl her-self had no notion of the bearing of her remarks; for if she had, she wouldnever have given voice to them. In this case it had been possible to hood-wink the censorship into allowing a phantasy which would normally havebeen kept in the preconscious to emerge into consciousness under the in-nocent disguise of making a complaint.612 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [The censorship between the Pcs. and the Cs. appears only rarely in Freud’s later
writings. It is, however, discussed at length in Section VI of his paper on ‘The
Unconscious’ (1915 e).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 612Here is another example. A fourteen-year-old boy came to me for
 psycho-analytic treatment suffering from tic convulsif, hysterical vomiting,
headaches, etc. I began the treatment by assuring him that if he shut his
eyes he would see pictures or have ideas, which he was then to communi-cate to me. He replied in pictures. His last impression before coming to mewas revived visually in his memory. He had been playing at draughts withhis uncle and saw the board in front of him. He thought of various posi-tions, favourable or unfavourable, and of moves that one must not make.He then saw a dagger lying on the board—an object that belonged to hisfather but which his imagination placed on the board. Then there was asickle lying on the board and next a scythe. And there now appeared a pic-ture of an old peasant mowing the grass in front of the patient’s distanthome with a scythe. After a few days I discovered the meaning of this seriesof pictures. The boy had been upset by an unhappy family situation. Hehad a father who was a hard man, liable to ﬁts of rage, who had been un-happily married to the patient’s mother, and whose educational methodshad consisted of threats. His father had been divorced from his mother,a tender and affectionate woman, had married again and had one daybrought a young woman home with him who was to be the boy’s newmother. It was during the ﬁrst few days after this that the fourteen-year-oldboy’s illness had come on. His suppressed rage against his father was whathad constructed this series of pictures with their understandable allusions.The material for them was provided by a recollection from mythology. Thesickle was the one with which Zeus castrated his father; the scythe and thepicture of the old peasant represented Kronos, the violent old man who devoured his children and on whom Zeus took such unﬁlial vengeance.[See p. 274.] His father’s marriage gave the boy an opportunity of repayingthe reproaches and threats which he had heard from his father long beforebecause he had played with his genitals. (Cf. the playing at draughts; theforbidden moves; the dagger which could be used to kill.) In this case long-repressed memories and derivatives from them which had remained un-conscious slipped into consciousness by a roundabout path in the form ofapparently meaningless pictures.
Thus I would look for the theoretical value of the study of dreams in the
contributions it makes to psychological knowledge and in the preliminarylight it throws on the problems of the psychoneuroses. Who can guess theimportance of the results which might be obtained from a thorough un-derstanding of the structure and functions of the mental apparatus, since613 F . The Unconscious and Consciousness9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 613even the present state of our knowledge allows us to exert a favourable
therapeutic inﬂuence on the curable forms of psychoneurosis? But what ofthe practical value of this study—I hear the question raised—as a means
towards an understanding of the mind, towards a revelation of the hiddencharacteristics of individual men? Have not the unconscious impulsesbrought out by dreams the importance of real forces in mental life? Is theethical signiﬁcance of suppressed wishes to be made light of—wisheswhich, just as they lead to dreams, may some day lead to other things?
I do not feel justiﬁed in answering these questions. I have not consid-
ered this side of the problem of dreams further. I think, however, that theRoman emperor was in the wrong when he had one of his subjects exe-cuted because he had dreamt of murdering the emperor. [See above, p.94 f.] He should have begun by trying to ﬁnd out what the dream meant;most probably its meaning was not what it appeared to be. And even if adream with another content had had this act of lèse majesté as its meaning,
would it not be right to bear in mind Plato’s dictum that the virtuous manis content to dream what a wicked man really does [p. 94 f.]? I think it is
best, therefore, to acquit dreams. Whether we are to attribute reality to un-
conscious wishes, I cannot say. It must be denied, of course, to any transi-tional or intermediate thoughts. If we look at unconscious wishes reducedto their most fundamental and truest shape, we shall have to conclude, nodoubt, that psychical reality is a particular form of existence not to be con-
fused with material reality.
1Thus there seems to be no justiﬁcation for
people’s reluctance in accepting responsibility for the immorality of theirdreams. When the mode of functioning of the mental apparatus is rightlyappreciated and the relation between the conscious and the unconsciousunderstood, the greater part of what is ethically objectionable in ourdream and phantasy lives will be found to disappear. In the words ofHanns Sachs [1912, 569]: ‘If we look in our consciousness at something614 VII. Psychology of the Dream-Processes
1 [This sentence does not appear in the ﬁrst edition. In 1909 it appeared in the
following form: ‘If we look at unconscious wishes reduced to their most funda-
mental and truest shape, we shall have to remember, no doubt, that psychical re-ality too has more than one form of existence.’ In 1914 the sentence ﬁrstappeared as printed in the text, except that the last word but one was ‘factual’and not ‘material.’ ‘Material’ was substituted in 1919.—The remainder of thisparagraph was added in 1914.—Freud had already drawn a distinction between‘thought reality’ and ‘external reality’ in the second section of Part III of his ‘Project’ (1950 a).]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 614that has been told us by a dream about a contemporary (real) situation, we
ought not to be surprised to ﬁnd that the monster which we saw under themagnifying glass of analysis turns out to be a tiny infusorian.’
Actions and consciously expressed opinions are as a rule enough for
practical purposes in judging men’s characters. Actions deserve to be con-sidered ﬁrst and foremost; for many impulses which force their waythrough to consciousness are even then brought to nothing by the realforces of mental life before they can mature into deeds. In fact, such im-pulses often meet with no psychical obstacles to their progress, for thevery reason that the unconscious is certain that they will be stopped atsome other stage. It is in any case instructive to get to know the muchtrampled soil from which our virtues proudly spring. Very rarely does thecomplexity of a human character, driven hither and thither by dynamicforces, submit to a choice between simple alternatives, as our antiquatedmorality would have us believe.
1
And the value of dreams for giving us knowledge of the future? There
is of course no question of that.2[Cf. p. 39 n.] It would be truer to say
instead that they give us knowledge of the past. For dreams are derivedfrom the past in every sense. Nevertheless the ancient belief that dreamsforetell the future is not wholly devoid of truth. By picturing our wishesas fulﬁlled, dreams are after all leading us into the future. But this future,which the dreamer pictures as the present, has been moulded by his in-destructible wish into a perfect likeness of the past.615 F . The Unconscious and Consciousness
1 [This subject is further discussed in Freud, 1925 i(Section B).]
2 [In the 1911 edition only, the following footnote appeared at this point: ‘Pro-
fessor Ernst Oppenheim of Vienna has shown me, from the evidence of folklore,
that there is a class of dreams in which the prophetic meaning has been droppedeven in popular belief and which are perfectly correctly traced back to wishesand needs emerging during sleep. He will shortly be giving a detailed account ofthese dreams, which are as a rule narrated in the form of comic stories.’]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 6159780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 616APPENDIX A
A PREMONITORY DREAM FULFILLED1
Frau B., an estimable woman who moreover possesses a critical sense,
told me in another connection and without the slightest arrière pensée
that once some years ago she dreamt she had met Dr. K., a friend and for-
mer family doctor of hers, in the Kärntnerstrasse2in front of Hiess’s shop.
The next morning, while she was walking along the same street, she infact met the person in question at the very spot she had dreamt of. Somuch for my theme. I will only add that no subsequent event proved theimportance of this miraculous coincidence, which cannot therefore be ac-counted for by what lay in the future.
Analysis of the dream was helped by questioning, which established the
fact that there was no evidence of her having had any recollection at all ofthe dream on the morning after she dreamt it, until after her walk— evidence such as her having written the dream down or told it to someone
6171[The manuscript of this paper is dated November 10, 1899—six days after the
publication of The Interpretation of Dreams. In the same letter to Fliess in which
Freud announced that event (Freud, 1950 a, Letter 123, of November 5, 1899)
he remarked that he had just discovered the origin and meaning of premonitory
dreams. The paper was ﬁrst published posthumously in Ges. Werke, 17(1941),
21. The present English translation (by James Strachey) ﬁrst appeared in Coll.
Papers, 5(1950), 70.—The same incident was reported by Freud very much
more brieﬂy in his Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b), Chapter XII, Sec-
tion D.—The topic of premonitory dreams is touched upon in The Interpreta-
tion of Dreams on pp. 97 and 659.]
2 [The principal shopping-street in the centre of Vienna.]9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 617before it was fulﬁlled. On the contrary, she was obliged to accept the fol-
lowing account of what happened, which seems to me more plausible,without raising any objection to it. She was walking along the Kärntners-trasse one morning and met her old family doctor in front of Hiess’s shop.On seeing him she felt convinced that she had dreamt the night before ofhaving this very meeting at that precise spot. According to the rules that ap-ply to the interpretation of neurotic symptoms, her conviction must havebeen justiﬁed; its content may, however, require to be re-interpreted.
The following is an episode with which Dr. K. is connected from Frau
B.’s earlier life. When she was young she was married, without her whole-hearted consent, to an elderly but wealthy man. A few years later he losthis money, fell ill of tuberculosis and died. For many years the youngwoman supported herself and her sick husband by giving music lessons.Among her friends in misfortune was her family doctor, Dr. K., who de-voted himself to looking after her husband and helped her in ﬁnding herﬁrst pupils. Another friend was a barrister, also a Dr. K., who put thechaotic affairs of the ruined merchant in order, while at the same time hemade love to the young woman and—for the ﬁrst and last time—set herpassion aﬂame. This love affair brought her no real happiness, for the scru-ples created by her upbringing and her cast of mind interfered with hercomplete surrender while she was married and later when she was a widow.In the same connection in which she told me the dream, she also told meof a real occurrence dating from this unhappy period of her life, an occur-rence which in her opinion was a remarkable coincidence. She was in herroom, kneeling on the ﬂoor with her head buried in a chair and sobbingin passionate longing for her friend and helper the barrister, when at thatvery moment the door opened and in he came to visit her. We shall ﬁndnothing at all remarkable in this coincidence when we consider how oftenshe thought of him and how often he probably visited her. Moreover, ac-cidents which seem preconcerted like this are to be found in every lovestory. Nevertheless this coincidence was probably the true content of herdream and the sole basis of her conviction that it had come true.
Between the scene in which her wish had been fulﬁlled and the time of
the dream more than twenty-ﬁve years elapsed. In the meantime Frau B.had become the widow of a second husband who left her with a child anda fortune. The old lady’s affection was still centred on Dr. K., who wasnow her adviser and the administrator of her estate and whom she saw fre-quently. Let us suppose that during the few days before the dream she hadbeen expecting a visit from him, but that this had not taken place—he was618 Appendix A9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 618no longer so pressing as he used to be. She may then have quite well had a
nostalgic dream one night which took her back to the old days. Her dreamwas probably of a rendez-vous at the time of her love affair, and the chain
of her dream-thoughts carried her back to the occasion when, without anypre-arrangement, he had come in at the very moment at which she hadbeen longing for him. She probably had dreams of this kind quite oftennow; they were a part of the belated punishment with which a womanpays for her youthful cruelty. But such dreams— derivatives of a sup-pressed current of thought, ﬁlled with memories of rendez-vous of which,
since her second marriage, she no longer liked to think—such dreams wereput aside on waking. And that was what happened to our ostensiblyprophetic dream. She then went out, and in the Kärntnerstrasse, at a spotwhich was in itself indifferent, she met her old family doctor, Dr. K. It wasa very long time since she had seen him. He was intimately associated withthe excitements of that happy-unhappy time. He too had been a helper,and we may suppose that he had been used in her thoughts, and perhapsin her dreams as well, as a screen ﬁgure behind which she concealed thebetter-loved ﬁgure of the other Dr. K. This meeting now revived her rec-ollection of the dream. She must have thought: ‘Yes, I had a dream lastnight of my rendez-vous with Dr. K.’ But this recollection had to undergo
the distortion which the dream escaped only because it had been com-pletely forgotten. She inserted the indifferent K. (who had reminded herof the dream) in place of the beloved K. The content of the dream—therendez-vous —was transferred to a belief that she had dreamt of that partic-
ular spot, for a rendez-vous consists in two people coming to the same spot
at the same time. And if she then had an impression that a dream had beenfulﬁlled, she was only giving effect in that way to her memory of the scenein which she had longed in her misery for him to come and her longinghad at once been fulﬁlled.
Thus the creation of a dream after the event, which alone makes pro -
phetic dreams possible, is nothing other than a form of censoring, thanksto which the dream is able to make its way through into consciousness.
10 Nov. 99619 Appendix A9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 6199780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 620APPENDIX B
LIST OF WRITINGS BY FREUD DEALING 
PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY WITH DREAMS
[It would scarcely be an exaggeration to say that dreams are alluded to in
the majority of Freud’s writings. The following list of works (of greatly varying
importance) may however be of some practical use. The date at the beginning
of each entry is that of the year during which the work in question was writ-
ten. The date at the end is that of publication; and under that date fuller par-ticulars of the work will be found in the General Bibliography. The items insquare brackets were published posthumously.]
[1895 ‘Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology’ (Sections 19, 20 and 21 of
Part I). (1950a.)]
1899 The Interpretation of Dreams. (1900a.)
[1899 ‘A Premonitory Dream Fulﬁlled.’ (1941 c.)]
1901 On Dreams. (1901a.)
1901 ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria.’ [Original title:
‘Dreams and Hysteria.’] (1905 e.)
1905 Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious Chapter VI). (1905c .)
1907 Delusions and Dreams in Jensen’s ‘Gradiva.’ (1907a.)
1910 ‘A Typical Example of a Disguised Oedipus Dream.’ (1910 l.)
1911 ‘Additions to the Interpretation of Dreams.’ (1911 a.)
1911 ‘The Handling of Dre am-Interpretation in Psycho-Analysis.’
(1911e .)
1913 ‘An Evidential Dream.’ (1913 a.)
6219780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 6211913 ‘The O ccurrence in Dreams of Material from Fairy Tales.’
(1913d .)
1913 ‘Observations and Examples from Analytic Practice.’ (1913 h.)
1914 ‘The Repr esentation in a Dream of a “Great Achievement.”’
(1914e .)
1916 Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Part II). (1916–1917.)
1917 ‘A Me tapsychological Supplement to the Theory of Dreams.’
(1917d .)
1918 ‘From the History of an Infantile Neurosis’ (Section IV). (1918 b.)
1920 ‘Supplements to the Theory of Dreams.’ (1920b.)
1922 ‘Dreams and Telepathy.’ (1922a.)1923 ‘Remarks upon the T heory and Practice of Dream-Interpretation.’
(1923c .)
1923 ‘Josef Popper-Lynkeus and the Theory of Dreams.’ (1923 f.)
1925 ‘Some Additional Notes on Dream-Interpretation as a Whole.’
(1925i .)
1929 ‘A Letter to Maxime Leroy on a Dream of Descartes.’ (1929 b.)
1932 ‘My Contact with Josef Popper-Lynkeus.’ (1932 c.)
1932 New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Lectures XXIX and
XXX). (1933a.)
[1938 An Outline of Psycho-Analysis (Chapter V). (1940a.)]
N.B.—An unauthorized concoction of portions of The Interpretation of
Dreams and On Dreams has appeared in two editions in America under the
title of Dream Psychology: Psychoanalysis for Beginners (with an introduction
by André T ridon). New York: McCann, 1920 and 1921. Pp. xi + 237.622 Appendix B9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 622ADDITIONAL NOTES
194, line 25. ‘Festschrift.’ This Festschrift was in honour of Professor
Strieker, Director of the Institute of Pathological Anatomy, at which
Dr. Gärtner was Assistant, and where Freud had worked in his stu-dent days.
447, line 26. The journal in question was the Wiener klinische Rundschau.523, line 4. ‘Nineteen.’ In the ﬁrst edition only (but not in the 1925
reprint of it) this read ‘seventeen.’ See Jones (1953), 35–6.
636, line 35. ‘Freud (1950 a). Aus den Anf ängen der Psychoanalyse. ’ An En-
glish translation of this work under the title of The Origins of  Psycho-
Analysis appeared in 1954 (London: Imago Publishing Co.). This
includes the ‘Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology’ written by Freud in1895.
6239780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 623A French Nurse’s Dream
12
34
56
789780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 624BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Titles of books and periodicals are in italics; titles of papers are in in-
verted commas. Abbreviations are in accordance with the World List of Sci-
entiﬁc Periodicals (Oxford, 1950). Numerals in thick type refer to volumes;
ordinary numerals refer to pages. G.S. = Freud, Gesammelte Schriften (12
vols.), Vienna, 1924–34. G.W. = Freud, Gesammelte Werke (18 vols.), Lon-
don, from 1940. C.P . = Freud, Collected Papers (5 vols.), London, 1924–50.
Standard Ed.— Freud, Standard Edition (24 vols.), London, from 1953. En-
tries marked with an asterisk have not been veriﬁed for the present edition.
See T ranslator’s Introduction, p. xx. For non-technical authors, and for tech-nical authors where no speciﬁc work is mentioned, see the General Index.].
A
AUTHOR INDEX AND LIST OF WORKS 
REFERRED TO IN THE TEXT
[The ﬁgures in round brackets at the end of each entry indicate the
page or pages of this volume on which the work in question is men-tioned. In the case of the Freud entries, the letters attached to the datesof publication are in accordance with the corresponding entries in thecomplete bibliography of Freud’s writings to be included in the last vol-ume of the Standard Edition. ]
Abel, K. (1884) Der Gegensinn der Urworte, Leipzig. (353, n. 3)
Abraham, K. (1909) Traum und Mythus, Vienna. (386, n. 2, 437)
Adler, A. (1910) ‘Der psychische Hermaphroditismus im Leben und in der
Neurose’, Fortschr. Med., 28,486. (432)
(1911) ‘Beitrag zur Lehre vom Widerstand’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1,214. (618 n .)
625 6259780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 625Allison, A. (1868) ‘Nocturnal Insanity’ Méd. Times & Gaz., 947, 210. (121)
Almoli, S. See Salomon Almoli.
Amram, N. (1901) ‘Sepher pithrôn chalômôth, Jerusalem’ (38, n. 2)
Aristotle De somniis and De divinatione per somnum. (36–7, 67, 130, n. 1,
355 n., 588–9) 
[Trans. by W. S. Hett (in volume ‘On the Soul’, Loeb Classical Library),
London & New York, 1935.]
Artemidorus of Daldis Oneirocritica. (37–8, 130, 131, n. 2, 389 n., 645,
n. 2) [German trans.: Symbolik der Träume by F . S. Krauss, Vienna, 1881, and
‘Erotische T räume und ihre Symbolik’, Anthropophyteia, 9,316, by
Hans Licht.Engl. trans, (abridged): The Interpretation of Dreams, by R. Wood, Lon-
don, 1644.]
Artigues, R. (1884) Essai sur la valeur séméiologique du rêve, (Thesis) Paris.
(68)
Benini, V. (1898) ‘La memoria e la durata dei sogni’, Riv. ital. Filos., 13a ,
149. (78, 103)
Bernard-Leroy andTobowolska, J. (1901) ‘Mécanisme intellectuel du
rêve’, Rev. phil., 51,570. (540–1)
Bernfeld, S. (1944) ‘Freud’s Earliest Theories and the School of Helm-
holtz’, Psychoanal. Quart., 13,341. (xvi n., 520 n.)
Bernstein, I., andSegel, B. W. (1908) Jüdische Sprichwürter und Redensar-
ten, Warsaw. (165, n. 1)
Betlheim, S., and Hartmann, H. (1924) ‘Über Fehlreaktionen des Ge-
dächtnisses bei Korsakoffschen Psychose’, Arch. Psychiat. Nervenkr., 72,
278. (419)
Bianchieri, F . (1912) ‘I sogni dei bambini di cinque anni’, Riv. Psicol., 8,
325. (164 n.)
See also Doglia and Bianchieri .
Binz, C. (1878) 
Über den Traum, Bonn. (53, 89, 109, 119)
Bleuler, E. (1910) ‘Die Psychoanalyse Freuds’, Jb. Psychoanal. psychopath.
Forsch., 2,623. (386, n. 2)
Bonatelli, F . (1880) ‘Del sogno’, La ﬁlosofta delle scuole italiane, Feb. 16. (78)
Börner, J. (1855) Das Alpdrücken, seine Begründung und Verhütung, Würz-
burg. (68)
Böttinger (1795) In C. P . J. Sprengel : Beiträge zur Geschichte der Medizin,
2.(67 n.)
Bouché-Leclercq, A. (1879–82) Histoire de la divination dans l’antiquité,
Paris. (67 n.)626 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 626Breuer, J., andFreud, S. (1895) see Freud, S. (1895 d)
(1940 [1892]) see Freud, S. (1940d )
Büchsenschütz, B. (1868) Traum und Traumdeutung im Altertum, Berlin.
(36 n. 2, 130, n. 1, 165, n. 2)
Burdach, K. F . (1838) Die Physiologie als Erfahrungswis-senschaft, Vol. 3 of
2nd ed., 1832–40 (1st ed. 1826–32). (41, 83, 85, 110, 114, 257)
Busemann, A. (1909) ‘T raumleben der Schulkinder’, Z. päd. Psychol., 10,
294. (164 n.)
(1910) ‘Psychologie der kindlichen T raumerlebnisse’, Z. päd. Psychol., 11,
320. (164 n.)
Cabanis, P . J. G. (1802) Rapports du physique et du moral de l’homme, Paris. (121)
Calkins, M. W. (1893) ‘Statistics of Dreams’, Amer. J. Psychol., 5,311. (53,
55, 77, 254–5)
Carena, Caesar (1641) Tractatus de Ofﬁcio Sanctissimae Inquisitionis, Cre-
mona. (102, n. 1)
Chabaneix, P . (1897) Physiologie cérébrale: le subconscient chez les artistes, les
savants, et les écrivains, Paris. (77, n., 97)
Cicero: De divinatione. (43, 88)
[Trans. by W. A. Falconer (Loeb Classical Library), London & New
York, 1922.]
Claparède, E. (1905) ‘Esquisse d’une théorie biologique du sommeil’, Arch.
psychol., 4,245. (85, n. 2)
Clerk-Maxwell, J. (1876) Matter and Motion, London. (493, 558)
Corlat, I. H. (1913) ‘Zwei sexual-symbolische Beispiele von Zahnarzt-
 T räumen’, Zbl. Psychoanal. Psychother., 3,440. (422, n. 1)
Dattner, B. (1913) ‘Gold und Kot’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1,495. (439)
Davidson, Wolf (1799) Versuch über den Schlaf, Berlin. 2nd ed. (1st ed.,
1795). (94)
Debacker, F . (1881) Des hallucinations et terreurs nocturnes chez les enfants,
(
Thesis) Paris. (168, n. 1, 625–6)
Delacroix, H. (1904) ‘Sur la structure logique du rêve’, Rev. Métaphys., 12,
921. (540)
Delage, Y. (1891) ‘Essai sur la théorie du rêve’, Rev. industr., 2,40. (52,
112–4, 212 n., 630)
Delbœuf, I. (1885) Le sommeil et les rêves, Paris. (45–6, 54–5, 84, 90, 93,
137–8, 212 n., 217, n. 1)
Diepgen, P . (1912) Traum und Traumdeutung als mediz. naturwissenschaftl.
Problem im Mittelatler, Berlin. (38, n. 2, 581 n.)
Doglia, S. andBianchieri, F . (1910–11) ‘I sogni dei bambini di tre anni’,
Contrib. psicol., 1,9. (164 n.)627 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 627Döllinger, J. (1857) Heidenthum und Judenthum, Regensburg. (67 n.)
Drexl, F . X. (1909) Achmets Traumbuch: Einleitung und Probe eines kritischen
T extes, (Thesis) Munich. (38, n. 2)
Dugas, L. (1897a) ‘Le sommeil et la cérébration inconsciente durant le som-
meil’, Rev. phil., 43,410. (88, 92)
(1897b) ‘Le souvenir du rêve’, Rev. phil, 44,220. (614)
Du Prel, C. (1885) Die Philosophie der Mystik, Leipzig. (96, n. 2, 164 n.,
167 n., 314, n. 1, 567 n., 650 n.)
Eder, M. D. (1913) ‘Augenträume’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 157. (433 n.)
Egger, V. (1895) ‘La durée apparente des rêves’, Rev. phil., 40,41. (60, 97, 534)
(1898) ‘Le souvenir dans le rêve’, Rev. phil., 46,154. (79)
Ellis, Havelock (1899) ‘The Stuff that Dreams are made of ’, Popular
Science Monthly, 54,721. (53, 92, 630)
(1911) The World of Dreams, London. (97, n . 2, 201, 215 n ., 388, 408,
438, 539, 581)
Erdmann, J. E. (1852) Psychologische Briefe (Brief VI), Leipzig (103)
Fechner, G. T. (1860) Elemente der Psychophysik, Leipzig. (81, 88, 574)
Federn, P . (1914) ‘Über zwei typische T raumsensationen’, Jb. Psychoanal., 6,
89. (430)
Féré, C. (1886) ‘Note sur un cas de paralysie hystérique consécutive à un
rêve’, Soc. biolog., 41 (Nov. 20). (120)
(1887) ‘A Contribution to the Pathology of Dreams and of Hysterical Pa-
ralysis’, Brain, 9, 488. (120, n . 1)
Fer
enczi, S. (1910) ‘Die Psychoanalyse der T räume’, Psychiat.-neurol. Wschr.,
12,Nos. 11–13. (131, n. 2, 165, n . 1, 278, n . 2, 361) 
[Trans.: ‘The Psychological Analysis of Dreams’, Chap. III of Contribu-
tions to Psychoanalysis, Boston, 1916.]
(1911) ‘Über lenkbare T räume’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2,31. (611)
(1912) ‘Symbolische Darstellung des Lust-und Realitätsprinzips im  Ödipus-
Mythos’, Imago, 1, 276. (297, n . 1) 
[Trans.: ‘The Symbolic Representation of the Pleasure and Reality Prin-
ciples in the Oedipus Myth’, Chap. X, Part I of Contributions to Psycho-
Analysis, Boston, 1916.]
(1913) ‘Zur Augensymbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 161. (433 n.)
[Trans.: ‘On Eye Symbolism’, Chap. X, Pt. II of Contributions to  Psycho-
Analysis, Boston, 1916.]
(1916) ‘Affektvertauschung im T räume’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 4, 112. (510) 
[Trans.: ‘Interchange of Affect in Dreams’, No. LV in Further Contribu-
tions, London, 1926.]
(1917) ‘T räume der Ahnungslosen’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 4, 208. (412)628 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 628[Trans.: ‘Dreams of the Unsuspecting’, No. LVI of Further Contribu-
tions, London, 1926.]
Fichte, I. H. (1864) Psychologie: die Lehre vom bewussten Geiste des Menschen,
(2 vols.), Leipzig. (41, 96, 103)
Fischer, K. P . (1850) Grundzüge des Systems der Anthropologie, Erlangen. (Pt.
I,Vol. 2, in Grundzüge des Systems der Philosophie. ) (98)
Fliess, W. (1906) Der Ablauf des Lebens, Vienna. (126, 199, n. 2)
Förster, M. (1910) ‘Das lateinisch-altenglische pseudo-Danielsche T raum-
buch in Tiberius A. III’, Archiv Stud. neueren Sprachen und Literaturen,
125, 39. (38, n. 2)
(1911) ‘Ein mittelenglisches Vers-T raumbuch des 13 Jahrhunderts’, Archiv
Stud, neueren Sprachen und Literaturen, 127, 31. (38, n. 2)
Foucault, M. (1906) Le rêve: études et observations, Paris. (541, 551 n.)
Freud, S. (1877a ) ‘Über den Ursprung der hinteren Nerven-wurzeln im
Rückerunark von Ammocoetes (Petromyzon Planeri)’, Sitzungsber. k.
Akad. Wiss., III Abt, Bd. 75, January. (448–9)
(1884e ) ‘Über Coca’, Centralbl. ges. Therap., 2,289. (203)
[Trans.: (abbreviated) ‘Coca’, Saint Louis Med. Surg. J., 47(1884), 502.]
(1893 c) ‘Quelques considérations pour une étude comparative des paralysies
motrices organiques et hystériques’, G.S., 1, 30; G.W., 1, 37. (601 n .)
[Trans.: ‘Some Points for a Comparative Study of Organic and Hysteri-
cal Motor Paralyses’, C.P ., 1, 42; Standard Ed., 1.]
(1894a ) ‘Die Abwehr-Neuropsychosen’, G.S., 1,290; G.W., 1,57. (xvi,
264 n.)[Trans.: ‘The Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’, C.P ., 1,59; S
 tandard
Ed., 3. ]
(1895b) ‘Über die Berechtigung, von der Neurasthenie einen bestimmten
Symptomenkomplex als “Angstneurose” abzutrennen’, G.S., 1,306;
G.W., 1, 313. (190, 195) 
[Trans.: ‘On the Grounds for Detaching a Particular Syndrome from
Neurasthenia under the Description “Anxiety Neurosis”’, C.P ., 1,76;
Standard Ed., 3.]
(1895 d) With Breuer, J., Studien über Hysterie, Vienna. ( G.S., 1,G.W., 1,75.
Omitting Breuer’s contributions.) (xiv–xvii, 112, n. 1, 132, 139, n.1 ,
176, n . 1, 212 n ., 520 n ., 560, 576, n . 2, 581 n ., 585, 608, n . 3, 640 n .) 
[Trans.: Studies on Hysteria, Standard Ed., 2. ]
(1896b ) ‘Weitere Bemerkungen über die Abwehr-Neuropsychosen’, G.S.,
1,363; G.W., 1, 377. (176 n. 1, 264 n., 584) 
[Trans.: ‘Further Remarks on the Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’, C.P ., 1,
155; Standard Ed., 3.]629 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 629Freud, S. (cont.)
(1898b ) ‘Zum psychischen Mechanismus der Vergesslichkeit’, G.W., 1,
517. (202, n. 1, 557, n. 1, 648 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘The Psychical Mechanism of Forgetting’, Standard Ed., 3.]
(1899a) ‘Über Deckerinnerungen’, GJS., 1,465; G.W., 1.(51 n., 205, n.
2, 279 n., 323, n. 2, 383, n. 9, 461, n. 1, 648 n.) [Trans.: ‘Screen Memories’, C.P., 5, 47; Standard Ed., 3.]
(1900a) Die Traumdeutung, Vienna. (G.S. , 2–3; G.W., 2–3.) 
[Trans.: The Interpretation of Dreams , London, 1954; Standard Ed., 4–5.]
(297, n . 1, 425, 427, 432)
(1901a ) Über den Traum, Wiesbaden. ( G.S., 3,189; G.W., 2–3, 643.) (166
n., 187, n. 1, 217, n. 1, 452 n., 477 n.)
[Trans.: On Dreams , London, 1951; Standard Ed., 5, 629.]
(1901b ) Zur Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens, B
 erlin. ( G.S., 4; G.W., 4.)
(151, n. 1, 202 n ., 230, n. 1, 244, n . 2, 281 n ., 290, n. 1, 330, n . 2, 435,
n. 1,493, n . 3, 539, n . 1, 553, n . 1, 557 n ., 570, n . 2, 573 n ., 648 n .) 
[Trans.: The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, Standard Ed ., 6.]
(1904a) ‘Die Freud’sche psychoanalytische Methode’, G.S., 6,3; G.W., 5,
3. (133 n.) [Trans.: ‘Freud’s Psycho-Analytic Method’, C.P ., 1,264; Standard Ed. 7.]
(1905c ) Der Witz und seine Beziehung zum Unbewussten , Vienna. ( G.S., 9;
G. W., 6.) (153 n., 227, n . 2, 301, n. 2, 332 n ., 338, n . 1, 376, n. 1,
391, n. 2, 481, n. 2, 518 n., 644 n .) 
[Tr 
ans.: Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious, Standard Ed ., 8.]
(1905d ) Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie, Vienna. ( G.S., 5,3; G.W.,
5,29.) (xii, 163, n. 2, 278, n. 1, 306, n. 2, 390, n. 1, 432, 531 n., 645,
n. 1) [Trans.: Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality , London, 1949; Standard
Ed., 7.]
(1905e ) ‘Bruchstück einer Hysterie-Analyse’, G.S., 8,3; G.W., 5,163. (xiv,
223, n. 1, 345 n., 376, n. 1, 389, 422, n . 2, 430, 532 n ., 554 n., 557, n.
2, 570, n . 1, 600, n . 1, 601, n . 2, 618 n .) 
[Trans.: ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’, C.P ., 3,13; Stan-
dard Ed., 7.]
(1907a) Der Wahn und die Träume in W. Jensens ‘Gradiva’, Vienna. (G.S. ,
9,273; G.W., 7, 31.) (129 n., 407 n.) 
[Trans.: Delusion and Dreams in Jensen’s ‘Gradiva’ , Standard Ed. , 9.]
(1908a ) ‘Hysterische P 
hantasien und ihre Beziehung zur Bisexualität’, G.S.,
5,246; G.W., 7, 191. (529, n . 3, 608) 
[Trans.: ‘Hysterical Phantasies and their Relation to Bisexuality’, C.P ., 2,
51; Standard Ed., 9.]630 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 630(1908b ) ‘Charakter und Analerotik’, G.S., 5,261; G.W., 7,203. (250, n . 1,
439) 
[T rans.: ‘Character and Anal Erotism’, C.P ., 2, 45; Standard Ed., 9.]
(1908c ) ‘Über infantile Sexualtheorien’, G.S., 5,168; G.W., 7,171. (283 n .) 
[Trans.: ‘On the Sexual Theories of Children’, C.P ., 2,59; Standard Ed., 9.]
(1908e ) ‘Der Dichter und das Phantasieren’, G.S., 10,229; G.W., 7,213.
(529, n. 3) [Trans.: ‘Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming’, C.P ., 4,173; Standard
Ed., 9. ]
(1909b ) ‘Analyse der Phobie eines fünfjährigen Knaben’, G.S., 8,129;
G.W., 7, 243. (164 n., 283 n., 284 n., 286 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’, C.P ., 3,149;
Standard Ed., 10.]
(1909d ) ‘Bemerkungen über einen Fall von Zwangsneurose’, G.S., 8,269;
G.W., 7, 381. (339 n ., 376, n . 1, 481, n . 2) 
[Trans.: ‘N
otes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’, C.P ., 3,293; Stan-
dard Ed., 10.]
(1910a ) Über Psychoanalyse , Vienna. ( G.S., 4, 349; G.W., 8, 3.) (647 n .) 
[Trans.: Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, Standard Ed ., 11. ]
(1910d ) ‘Die zukünftigen Chancen der psychoanalytischen Therapie’,
G.S., 6, 25; G.W., 8, 104. (390, n. 2, 401, 405, 439, n. 2) 
[Trans.: ‘The Future Prospects of Psycho-Analytic Therapy’, C.P ., 2,
285; Standard Ed., 11.]
(1910e ) ‘“Über den Gegensinn der Urworte”’, G.S., 10,221; G.W., 8,214.
(353, n. 3) [Trans.: ‘“The Antithetical Sense of Primal Words”’, C.P ., 4,184; Stan-
dard Ed., 11.]
(1910f ) ‘Brief an Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss über die Anthro-pophyteia’, G.S.,
11,242; G.W., 8, 224. (645, n. 2) 
[Trans.: ‘Letter to Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss on Anthro-pophyteia’, Standard
Ed., 11. ]
(1910h ) ‘Über einen besonderen Typus der Objektwahl beim Manne’ (Bei-
träge zur Psychologie des Liebeslebens’ I), G.S., 5, 186; G.W., 8,66.
(297, n. 1, 439, n. 2) [Tr 
ans.: ‘A Special Type of Choice of Object made by Men’ (‘Contribu-
tions to the Psychology of Love’ I), C.P ., 4, 192; Standard Ed., 11.]
(1910l ) ‘Typisches Beispiel eines verkappten Ödipustraumes’, Zentralbl.
Psychoanal., 1,45; reprinted in Die Traum-deutung, G.S., 3,118, n.;
G.W., 2–3, 404 n. (178 n., 433 n.) [Trans.: ‘A Typical Example of a Disguised Oedipus Dream’; included
in The Interpretation of Dreams, Standard Ed., 5, 398 n.]631 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 631Freud, S. (cont.)
(1911a ) ‘Nachträge zur T raumdeutung’, Zentralbl. Psycho-anal, 1,187.
(Partly reprinted G.S., 3,77 ff. and 126 f.; G.W., 2–3, 365 ff. and 412
f.) (395 n., 401, n. 1, 443 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘Additions to the Interpretation of Dreams’, (wholly incorpora-
ted in The Interpretation of Dreams, Standard Ed., 5, 360 ff. and 408 f.)]
(1911b ) ‘Formulierungen über die zwei Prinzipien des psychischen
 Geschehens’, G.S., 5, 409; G.W., 8, 230. (466 n., 606, n. 2) 
[Trans.: ‘Formulations on the T wo Principles of Mental Functioning’,
C.P ., 4, 13; Standard Ed., 12.]
(1911e ) ‘Die Handhabung der T raumdeutung in der Psycho-analyse’, G.S.,
6,45; G.W., 8, 350. (136 n., 553, n. 1) 
[Trans.: ‘The Handling of Dream-Interpretation in Psycho- Analysis’,
C.P ., 2, 305; Standard Ed., 12.]
(1912g ) ‘Einige Bernerkungen über den Begriff des Unbe-wussten in der
Psychoanalyse’, G.W., 8, 360. (653 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘Some Remarks on the Concept of the Unconscious as used in
Psycho-Analysis’, C.P ., 4, 22; Standard Ed., 12.]
(1912–13) Totem und T abu, Vienna. (G.S., 10;G.W., 9.) (289, n. 1, 290
n., 297, n. 1, 445 n., 539, n. 1) [Trans.: Totem and T aboo , London, 1950; Standard Ed., 13. ]
(1913a) ‘Ein T raum als Beweismittel’, G.S., 3,267; G.W., 10,12. (386, n.
1, 528, n. 1, 601, n. 1) [Trans.: ‘An Evidential Dream’, C.P ., 2, 133; Standard Ed., 13.]
(1913d ) ‘Märchenstoffe in T räumen’, G.S., 3,259; G.W., 10,2. (Appen-
dix B, 666) [Trans.: ‘The Occurrence in Dreams of Material from Fairy Tales’, C.P .,
4,236; Standard Ed., 13.]
(1913f ) ‘Das Motiv der Kästchenwahl’, G.S., 10,243–56; G.W., 10,24–37. 
[Trans.: ‘The Theme of the Three Caskets’, C.P ., 4,244–56; Standard
Ed., 12. ]
(1913h ) ‘Erfahrungen und Beispiele aus der analytischen Praxis’, Int. Z.
Psychoanal., 1,377. (Partly reprinted G.S., 11,301; G.W., 10,40.
Partly included in Traumdeutung, G.S., 3, 41, 71 f., 127 and 135; G.W .,
2–3
, 238, 359 ff., 413 f. and 433.) (265, n. 2, 444, n. 2, 467, n. 1) 
[Trans.: ‘Observations and Examples from Analytic Practice’, Standard
Ed., 13(in full). Also partly incorporated in The Interpretation of
Dreams, Standard Ed., 4,232 and 5, 409 f.]
(1913k ) ‘Geleitwort zu Bourke’s Der Unrat in Sitte, Brauch, Glauben und
Gewohnheitsrecht der Vöjker ’, G.S., 11, 249; G.W., 10, 453. (645, n. 2) 632 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 632[T rans.: ‘Preface to Bourke, Scatalogic Rites of All Nations’, C.P ., 5, 88;
Standard Ed., 12. ]
(1914a ) ‘Über fausse reconnaissance (“déjà raconté”) während der
 psychoanalytischen Arbeit’, G.S., 6, 76; G.W., 10, 116. (435, n. 1)
[Trans.: ‘Fausse reconnaissance (“déjà raconté”) in Psycho-Analytic
T reatment’, C.P ., 2, 334; Standard Ed., 14.]
(1914 c) ‘Zur Einführung des Narzissmus’, G.S., 6,155; G.W., 10,138
(543, n. 2) 
[Trans.: ‘On Narcissism: an Introduction’, Cf., 4,30; Standard Ed., 14.]
(1914d ) ‘Zur Geschichte der psychoanalytischen Bewegung’, G.S., 4,411;
G.W., 10, 44. (xii, xiv, 384, n. 3) 
[Trans.: ‘On the History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement’, C.P ., 1,
287; Standard Ed., 14.]
(1914e ) ‘Darstellungen der “grossen Leistung” im T raume’, Int. Z. Psycho -
anal., 2,384; reprinted in Die Traumdeutung, G.S., 3,130; G.W., 2–3,
416. (448, n. 1) [Trans.: ‘The Representation in a Dream of a “Great Achievement”’; in-
cluded in The Interpretation of Dreams, Standard Ed., 5, 412.]
(1915a ) ‘Weitere Ratschläge zur Technik der Psychoanalyse III: Bemerkun-
gen über die Übertragungsliebe’, G.S., 6,120; G.W., 10,306. (601, 
 n. 2) 
[Trans.: ‘Observations on T ransference-Love (Further Recommenda-
tions on the Technique of Psycho-Analysis, III)’, C.P ., 2,377; Standard
Ed., 12. ]
(1915b) ‘Zeitgemässes über Krieg und Tod’, G.S., 10,315–46; G.W., 10,
324–55. (289, n. 1) [Trans.: ‘Thoughts for the Times on War and Death’, C.P ., 4,288–317;
Standard Ed., 14.]
(1915d ) ‘Die Verdrängung’, G.S., 5,466; G.W., 10,248. (586, n . 2, 643 n .) 
[Trans.: ‘Repression’, C.P ., 4, 84; Standard Ed. , 14.]
(1915 e) ‘Das Unbewusste’, G.S., 5,480; G.W., 10,264. (640 n., 649 n.,
656 n .) 
[Trans.: ‘The Unconscious’, C.P ., 4, 98; Standard Ed. , 14.]
(1916c ) ‘Eine Beziehung zwischen einem Symbol und einem Symptom’,
G.S., 5, 310; G.W., 10, 394. (397 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘A Connection between a Symbol and a Symptom’, C.P., 2,
162; 
Standard Ed., 14.]
(1916d ) ‘Einige Charaktertypen aus der psychoanalytischen Arbeit’, G.S.,
10,287; G.W., 10, 364. (300 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘Some Character-Types Met with in Psycho-Analytic Work’,
C.P ., 4, 318; Standard Ed., 14.]633 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 633Freud, S. (cont.)
(1916–17) Vorlesungen zur Einführung in die Psychoanalyse, Vienna. (G.S.,
7; G.W., 11.) (xxix, 51 n., 166 n., 176, n. 2, 188 n. 1, 265 n. 2, 311 n.,
332 n., 395, 399, n. 1, 440 n., 444, n. 1, 449, n. 1, 452 n., 466, n. 1,
556 n., 620 n.) 
[Trans.: Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, revised ed. London,
1929; Standard Ed. , 15and 16.]
(1917d ) ‘Metapsychologische Ergänzung zur T raumlehre’, G.S., 5,520;
G.W., 10, 412. (67 n., 563, n. 1, 580 n., 587, 593 n.)
[Trans.: ‘A Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory of Dreams’,
C.P ., 4, 137; Standard Ed., 14.]
(1918b ) ‘Aus der Geschichte einer infantilen Neurose’, G.S., 8,439; G.W.,
12,29. (217, n . 2, 345 n ., 407 n ., 561, n . 1) 
[Trans.: ‘From the History of an Infantile Neurosis’, C.P ., 3,473; Stan-
dard
 Ed., 17.]
(1919h ) ‘Das Unheimliche’, G.S., 10,369; G.W., 12,229. (392 n ., 449, n . 3) 
[Trans.: ‘“The Uncanny”’, C.P ., 4, 368; Standard Ed., 17.]
(1920a) ‘Über die Psychogenese eines Falles von weiblicher Homosexuali-
tät’, G.S., 5, 312; G.W., 12, 271. (514, n. 2) 
[Trans .: ‘The Psychogenesis of a Case of Female Homosexuality’, C.P .,
2,202; Standard Ed., 18.]
(1920 f) ‘Ergänzungen zur T raumlehre’ (Author’s Abstract of Congress Ad-
dress), Int. Z. Psychoanal., 6, 397. (Appendix B, 666) 
[Trans.: ‘Supplements to the Theory of Dreams’, Int. J. Psycho-Anal., 1,
354; Standard Ed., 18.]
(1920g ) Jenseits des Lustprinzips, Vienna. (G.S., 6,191; G.W., 13,3.) (278, n .
2, 301, n . 2, 498 n ., 578 n ., 597, n . 1, 604 n ., 640 n .) 
[Trans.: Beyond the Pleasure Principle , London, 1950; Standard Ed ., 18. ]
(1921 b) Introduction [in English] to Varendonck, The Psychology of Day-
Dreams, 
London. ( G.W., 13, 439; Standard Ed., 18.) (529, n . 3)
(1921c ) Massenpsychologie und Ich-Analyse, Vienna. (G.S., 6,261; G.W.,
13,73.) (184 n., 514, n. 1) 
[Trans.: Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, London, 1922;
Standard Ed. , 18.]
(1922a) ‘T raum und Telepathie’, G.S., 3,278; G.W., 13,165. (39 n., 195,
n. 1, 366, n., 439, n. 2, 563, n. 1, 599, n. 2, 618, n.) [Trans.: ‘Dreams and Telepathy’, C.P ., 4, 408; Standard Ed., 18.]
(1922b ) ‘Über einige neurotische Mechanismen bei Eifer-sucht, Paranoia
und Homosexualität’, G.S., 5. 387; G.W., 13, 195. (121 n .) 
[Trans .: ‘Some Neurotic Mechanisms in Jealousy, Paranoia and Homo-
sexuality’, C.P ., 2, 232; Standard Ed., 18.]634 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 634(1922c ) ‘Nachschrift zur Analyse des kleinen Hans’, G.S., 8,264; G.W.,
13,431. (559, n. 3) 
[Trans.: ‘Postscript to the “Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old-
Boy”’, C.P ., 3, 288; Standard Ed., 10.]
(1923a [1922]) ‘“Psychoanalyse” und “Libido Theorie”’, G.S., 11,201;
G.W., 13, 211. (528, n. 1) 
[Trans.: T wo Encyclopædia Articles’, C.P ., 5, 107; Standard Ed., 18.]
(1923b ) Das Ich und das Es, Vienna. (G.S., 6,353; G.W., 13,237.) (194
n., 514, n. 1, 580 n., 603 n., 653 n.) 
[Trans.: The Ego and the Id , London, 1927; Standard Ed., 19.]
(1923c ) ‘Bemerkungen zur Theorie und Praxis der T raumdeutung’, G.S.,
3,305; G.W., 13, 301. (136 n., 197 n., 358, n. 3, 514, n. 1)
[Trans.: ‘Remarks on the Theory and Practice of Dream-Interpretation’,
C.P ., 5, 136; Standard Ed., 19.]
(1923d ) ‘Eine Teufelsneurose im siebzehnten Jahrhundert’, G.S., 10,409;
G.W., 
13,317. (393, n. 3) 
[Trans.: ‘A Seventeenth Century Demonological Neurosis’, C.P ., 4,436;
Standard Ed., 19.]
(1923f ) ‘Josef Popper-Lynkeus und die Theorie des T raumes’, G.S., 11,
295; G.W., 13, 357. (126, n. 3, 343, n. 2) 
[Trans.: ‘Josef  Popper-Lynkeus and the Theory of Dreams’, Standard
Ed., 19. ]
(1924–34) Gesammelte Schriften, Vienna, (xii, xxxi, 37, n. 1, 55, n. 1, 160,
n. 1, 223, n. 2, 346 n., 546 n.)
(1924 c) ‘Das ökonomische Problem des Masochismus’, G.S., 5,374; G.W.,
13,371. (192, n. 3) 
[Trans.: ‘The Economic Problem of Masochism’, C.P ., 2,255; Standard
Ed., 19. ]
(1925a ) ‘Notiz über den Wunderblock’, G.S., 6,415; G.W., 14,3. (578 n .) 
[Trans.: ‘A Note on the “Mystic Writing-Pad”’, C.P ., 5,175; Standard
Ed., 20. ]
(1925d ) ‘Selbstdarstellung’, G.S., 11, 119; G.W. , 14, 33. (474 n .) 
[Tr
ans.: An Autobiographical Study , London, 1935; Standard Ed. , 20.]
(1925i ) ‘Einige Nachtröge zum Ganzen der T raumdeutung’, G.S., 3,172;
G.W., 1, 559. (39 n., 106, n. 2, 563, n. 2, 659, n. 2) 
[Trans.: ‘Some Additional Notes upon Dream-Interpretation as a
Whole’, C.P ., 5, 150; Standard Ed., 20.]
(1925j ) ‘Einige psychische Folgen des anatomischen Geschlechtsunter-
schieds’, G.S., 11, 8; G.W., 14, 19. (291 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘Some Psychological Consequences of the Anatomical Distinc-
tion between the Sexes’, C.P ., 5, 186; Standard Ed., 19.]635 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 635Freud, S. (cont.)
(1926d ) Hemmung, Symptom und Angst, Vienna. (G.S., 11,23; G.W., 13,
113.) (195, n. 2, 373, n. 1, 436, n. 2, 643 n.) 
[Trans.: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, London, 1936; The Problem
of Anxiety , New York, 1936; Standard Ed. , 20.]
(1927 c) Die Zukunft einer Illusion, Vienna. (G.S. , 11,411; G.W., 14,325.)
(492, n. 1) [Trans.: The Future of an Illusion , London, 1928; Standard Ed., 21. ]
(1929b ) ‘Brief an Maxime Leroy über einen T raum des Cartesius’, G.S.,
12,403; G.W., 14, 558. (Appendix B, 666) 
[Trans.: ‘A Letter to Maxime Leroy on a Dream of Descartes’, Standard
Ed., 21. ]
(1930a ) Das Unbehagen in der Kultur, Vienna. (G.S., 12,29; G.W., 14,
421). (109 n.) [Trans.: Civilization and its Discontents , London, 1930; Standard Ed. ,
21.]
(1930e ) ‘Goethe-Preis 1930’, G.S., 12,406; G.W., 14,545. (175 n., 300 n.) 
[Tr
ans.: ‘The Goethe Prize for 1930’, Standard Ed., 21.]
(1931b ) ‘Über die weibliche Sexualität’, G.S., 12,120; G.W., 14,517.
(291 n.) [Trans.: ‘Female Sexuality’, C.P ., 5, 252; Standard Ed., 21.]
(1932c ) ‘Meine Berührung mit Josef Popper-Lynkeus’, G.S., 12,415;
G.W., 16, 261. (xii, 126, n. 3, 343, n. 2) 
[Trans.: ‘My Contact with Josef Popper-Lynkeus’, C.P ., 5,295; Standard
Ed., 22. ]
(1933a ) Neue Folge der Vorlesungenzur Einführung in die Psychoanalyse ,
Vienna. ( G.S., 12,151; G.W. , 15.) (39 n ., 124 n ., 369 n ., 528, n . 2, 543,
n. 2, 569 n ., 580 n ., 597, n . 1, 643 n .) 
[Trans.: New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, London, 1933;
Standard Ed. , 22.]
(1940a [1938]) Abriss der Psychoanalyse, (G.W., 17,67.) (Appendix B, 666) 
[Trans.: An Outline of Psycho-Analysis , London and N e
 w York, 1949;
Standard Ed. , 23.]
(1940c [1922]) ‘Das Medusenhaupt’, G.W., 17, 47. (392 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘Medusa’s Head’, C.P ., 5, 105; Standard Ed., 18.]
(1940d [1892]) With Breuer, J., ‘Zur Theorie des hysterischen Anf alls’,
G.W., 17, 9. (xvii) 
[Trans.: ‘On the Theory of Hysterical Attacks’, C.P ., 5,27; Standard
Ed., 1. ]
(1941a [1892]) ‘Brief an Josef Breuer’, G.W., 17, 5. (604 n.) 
[Trans.: ‘A Letter to Josef Breuer’, C.P ., 5, 25; Standard Ed., 1.]636 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 636(1941c [1899]) ‘Eine erfüllte T raumahnung’, G.W., 17,21. (39 n., 97, n.
3, 661–4) 
[Trans.: ‘A Premonitory Dream Fulﬁlled’, C.P ., 5,70; Standard Ed., 5,
623.
(1950a [1887–1902]) Aus den Anfängen der Psychoanalyse, London, (xii, xiv-
xx, xxvi, 51 n ., 126, n . 1, 145, n . 1, 149, n . 2, 150 n ., 151, n . 1, 154 n .,
155 n., 158 n., 163 n., 170 n., 175 n ., 178 n., 184 n., 190, n. 2, 195, n .
1, 205, n . 1, 226, n . 1, 226, n. 2, 227, n. 2, 228, n . 2, 233 n., 238, nn. 1
and 2, 247 n ., 265 n., 274 n ., 277, n. 1, 281 n., 297, n. 1, 301, n . 2, 332
n., 352 n ., 353, n . 1, 422, n . 2, 461, n . 1, 472 n ., 475 n., 491, n . 2, 501
n., 505 n., 530 n.,537 n., 547 n.,
553, n. 2, 574 n ., 578 n., 604 n., 632
n., 640 n., 644 n ., 647 n ., 654 n ., 659, n . 1, 661, n . 1, 667) [In part in
Standard Ed., 1.]
Fuchs, E. (1909–12) Illustrierte Sittengeschichte (Ergänzungs-bande), Mu-
nich. (382 n.)
Galton, F . (1907) Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development, 2nd ed.,
Everyman’s Edition, London (1st ed., 1883.) (172, 328, 532–3)
Garneer, A. (1872) Traité des facultés de Pâme, contenant l’histoire des princi-
pales théories psychologiques, (3 vols.), Paris. (1st ed., 1852.) (60, 266–7)
Giessler, C. M. (1888) Beiträge zur Phänomenologie des T raumlebens,
Halle. (120, n. 1)
(1890) Aus den Tiefen des Traumlebens , Halle. (120, n. 1)
(1896) Die physiologischen Beziehungen der Traumvor-gänge , Halle. (120,
n. 1)
Girou de Bouzareinges, C. and Girou de Bouzareinges, L. (1848) Physio -
logie: essai sur le mécanisme des sensations, des idées et des sentiments, Paris.
(58)
Goblot, E. (1896) ‘Sur le souvenir des rêves’, Rev. phil., 42,288. (540, 614)
Gomperz, T. (1866) Traumdeutung und Zauberei, Vienna. (130, n. 2)
Gotthardt, O. (1912) Die Traumbcher des Mittelalters, Eisleben. (38, n . 2)
Grœsinger, W. (1845) Pathologie und Therapie der psychischen Krankheiten,
Stuttgart. (167)
(1861) do., 2nd ed. (quoted by Radestock). (123, 264 n.)
Gruppe, O. (1906) Griechische Mythologie und Religions-geschichte, M unich.
(I
n Müller, Handbuch der klassischen Altertums-Wissenschaft, 5,2.)
(37–8)
Guislain, J. (1833) Leçons orales sur les phrénopathies (3 vols.), Brussels. (121)
[Quotation in text is from German trans.: Abhandlungen über die Phre-nopathien, Nuremberg, 1838.]
Haffner, P . (1887) ‘Schlafen und T räumerf, Sammlung zeitgemässer Broschü-
ren, 226, Frankfurt. (39, 84 n., 96, n. 1, 99–101)637 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 637Hagen, F . W. (1846) ‘Psychologie und Psychiatrie’, Wagner’s Handwörterbuch
der Physiologie, 2,692, Brunswick. (122)
Hallam, F . and Weed, S. (1896) ‘A Study of Dream Consciousness’, Amer.
J. Psychol., 7, 405. (52, 168, 197)
Hartmann, E. von (1890) Philosophie des Unbewussten, 10th ed., Leipzig.
(1st ed., 1869.) (167, 567 n.) 
[Trans.: Philosophy of the Unconscious, by W. C. Coup-land, London,
1884.]
Hartmann, H., See Betlheim and Hartmann.
Hennings, J. C. (1784) Von den Träumen und Nachtwandlern, Weimar. (47, 58)
Henzen, W. (1890) Über die Träume in der altnordischen Sagaliteratur, (The-
sis) Leipzig. (442–3)
Herbert, J. F . (1892) Psychologie als Wissenschaft neu gegrundet auf Erfahrung,
Metaphysik und Mathematik. (Zweiter, analytischer T eil ); Vol. 6 in Her-
bart’s Sämtliche Werke (ed. K. Kehrbach), Langensalza. (1st ed., Königs-berg, 1825.) (108)
Hermann, K. F . (1858) Lehrbuch der gottesdienstlichen Alterthümer der Grie-
chen, 2nd ed., Heidelberg. (Pt. II of Lehrbuch der griechischen Antiqui-
täten. ) (67 n.)
(1882) Lehrbuch der griechischen Privatalterthümer , 3rd ed., Freiburg. (Pt.
IV of Lehrbuch der griechischen Antiquitäten ). (67 n.)
Herodotus History. (433 n.) 
[Trans, by A. D. Godley, Vol. III (Loeb Classical Library), London and
New York, 1922.]
Hervey de Saint-Denys, Marquis d’ , (1867) Les rêves et les moyens de les di-
riger, Paris. (Published anonymously.) (47, 59, 93–4, 611)
Hildebrandt, F . W. (1875) Der Traum und seine Verwer-thung für’s Leben,
Leipzig. (43–4, 49, 52–4, 59–61, 88, 95–7, 99–104)
Hippocrates Ancient Medicine and Regimen. (37, n. 3, 67 n., 438)
[Trans, by W. H. S. Jones, Vols. I and IV (Loeb Classical Library), Lon-
don and New York, 1923 and 1931.]
Hi
tschmann, E. (1913) ‘Goethe als Vatersymbol’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1,
569. (389) Hobbes, T. (1651) Leviathan, London. (581 n.)
Hoffbauer, J. C. (1796) Naturlehre der Seele, Halle. (58)
Hohnbaum (1830) In C. F . Nasse: Jb. Anthrop., 1(120)
Hug-Hellmuth, H. von (1911) ‘Analyse eines T raumes eines 5½ jährigen
Knaben’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2, 122. (164 n.)
(1913) ‘Kindertraume’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 470. (164 n.)
(1915) ‘Ein T raum der sich selbst deutet’, Int. Z. Psycho-anal., 3, 33. (176,
n. 2)638 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 638*Ideler, K. W. (1862) ‘Die Enstehung des Wahnsinns aus den T raumen’,
Charité Annalen, 3, Berlin. (120, n. 1)
*Iwaya, S. (1902) T raumdeutung in Japan’, Ostasien, 302. (38, n. 2)
Jekels, L. (1917) ‘Shakespeare’s Macbeth’, Imago, S, 170. (300 n.)
Jessen, P . (1855) Versuch einer wissenschaftlichen Begründung der Psychologie,
Berlin. (42, 47, 57, 79, 98, 104)
Jodl, F . (1896) Lehrbuch der Psychologie, Stuttgart. (89)
Jones, E. (1910a ) ‘The Oedipus Complex as an Explanation of Hamlet’s
Mystery’, Amer. J. Psychol., 21,72. (300 n.)
(1910b ) ‘Freud’s Theory of Dreams’, Amer. J. PsychoL, 21,283. (436–7)
(1911) ‘The Relationship between Dreams and Psycho-neurotic Symp-
toms’, Am. J. Insanity, 68,57. (608, n. 2)
(1912a) ‘Unbewusste Zahlenbehandlung’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2,241. (453,
n. 2)
(1912b) ‘A Forgotten Dream’, J. Abnorm. PsychoL, 7, 5. (559, n. 2)
(1914a) ‘Frau und Zimmer’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 2, 380. (389 n.)
(1914b ) ‘Zahnziehen und Geburt’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 2, 380. (423, n . 1)
(1916) The Theory of Symbolism’, Brit. J. PsychoL, 9,181. (386, n. 2)
(1949) Hamlet and Oedipus, London. (300 n.)
(1953) Sigmund Freud: Life and Work, 1, London, (xxii, 144, n. 1, 203 n .,
667)
Josep
hus, Flavius Antiquitates Judaicae. (369) 
[Trans.: Ancient History of the Jews by W. Whiston, London, 1874.]
Jung, C. G. (ed.) (1906) Diagnostische Assoziationsstudien (2 vols.), Leipzig.
(570, n. 2) 
[Trans.: Studies in Word-Association, London.]
(1907) Über die Psychologie der Dementia præcox, Halle. (568 n.)
[Trans.: The Psychology of Dementia Præcox, New York, 1909.]
(1910a) ‘Über Konﬂikte der kindlichen Seele’, Jb. psycho-anal, psychopath.
Forsch., 2,33. (164 n.)
(1910b ) ‘Ein Beitrag zur Psychologie des Gerüchtes’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1,
81. (370)
(1911) ‘Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis des Zahlentraumes’, Zbl. PsychoanaL, 1,
567. (453, n. 2)
Kant, I. (1764) Versuch über die Krankheiten des Kopjes. (121–2)
(1798) Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsichi . (103–4)
Karpinska, L. von (1914) ‘Ein Beitrag zur Analyse “sinnloser” Worte in
T raume’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 2, 164. (339)
Kazowsky, A. D. (1901) ‘Zur Frage nach dem Zusammenhange von T räu-
men und Wahnvorstellungen’, Neurol. Zbl., 440 and 508. (120, n. 1)639 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 639Kerchgraber, F . (1912) ‘Der Hut als Symbol des Genitales’, Zbl. Psycho anal.
Psychother., 3,95. (397 n.)
Kleinpaul, R. (1898) Die Lebendigen und die Toten in Volksglauben, Religion
und Sage, Leipzig. (386, n. 2)
Krauss, A. (1858–59) ‘Der Sinn im Wahnsinn’, Allg. Z. Psychol., 15,617
and 16, 222. (70–1, 120–2, 123)
Krauss, F . S. See Artemidorus. (391, n. 1)
Ladd, G. T. (1892) ‘Contribution to the Psychology of Visual Dreams’,
Mind, (New Series) 1, 299. (66–7, 628)
Landauer, K. (1918) ‘Handlungen des Schlafenden’, Z. ges. Neur. Psychiat.,
39, 329. (258 n.)
*Lasègue, C. (1881) ‘Le délire alcoolique n’est pas un délire, mais un rêve’,
Arch. gén. Méd. (120, n. 1)
Lauer, C. (1913) ‘Das Wesen des T raumes in der Beurteilung der talmudi-
schen und rabbinischen Literatur’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1,459. (38,
n.2)
Lehmann, A. (1908) Aberglaube und Zauberei von den ältesten Zeiten bis in
die Gegenwart (German trans, by Petersen), Stuttgart. (67 n.)
Le Lorrain, J. (1894) ‘La durée du temps dans les rêves’, Rev. phil., 38,275.
(60, 97, 534) (1895) ‘Le rêve’, Rev. phil, 40,59. (534, 606, n . 1)
Lélut. (1852) ‘Mémoire sur les sommeil, les songes et le sonnambulisme’,
Ann. méd.-psychol., 4, 331. (121)
Lemoine, A. (1855) Du sommeil au point de vue physiologique et psychologique,
Paris. (87)
Leroy. See Bernard-Leroy.
Leuret, F . (1834) Fragments psychologiques sur la folie, Paris. (568)
Liébeault, A. A. (1889) Le sommeil provoqué et les états analogues, Paris.
(609 n.)
Lipps, T. (1883) Grundtatsachen des Seelenlebens, Bonn. (257)
(1897) ‘Der Begriff des Unbewussten in der Psychologie’, Records of the
Third Internat. Congr. Psychol., Munich. (650–51, 652)
*Lloyd, W. (1877) Magnetism and Mesmerism in Antiquity, London (67 n.)
Löwinger .(1908) ‘D
er T raum in der jüdischen Literatur’, Mitt. jüd. Volksk.,
10.(38, n. 2)
Lucretius De rerum natura. (42)
[Trans, by W. H. D. Rouse (Loeb Classical Library), London and New
York, 1924.]
‘Lynkeus’ (J. Popper) (1899) Phantasien eines Realisten, Dresden. (126, 343,
n. 2)
Maass, J. G. E. (1805) Versuch über die Leidenschaften, Halle. (42)640 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 640Macario, M. M. A. (1847) ‘Des rêves, considérés sous le rapport physio -
logique et pathologique’, Pt. II, Ann. médpsychol., 9, 27. (121)
(1857) Du sommeil, des rêves et du sonnambulisme dans l’état de santé et de
maladie, Paris-Lyons. (536)
Macntsh, R. (1830) Philosophy of Sleep, Glasgow. (58)
[German trans.: Der Schlaf in alien seinen Gestalten, Leipzig, 1835.]
Maeder, A. (1908) ‘Die Symbolik in den Legenden, Märchen, Gebrauchen,
und T räumen’, Psychiat.-neurol. Wschr., 10,55. (386, n. 2)
(1912) ‘Über die Funktion des T raumes’, Jb. psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch.,
4,692. (618 n .)
Maine de Biran, M. F . P . (1834) Nouvelles considérations sur les rapports du
physique et du moral de l’homme, (ed. by V. Cousin), Paris. (121)
Marcinowski, J. (1911) ‘Eine kleine Mitteilung’, Zbl. Psycho-anal, 1,575.
(337–8)
(1912a) ‘Gezeichnete T räume’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2,490 (391)
(1912b) ‘Drei Romane in Zahlen’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2,619. (453, n. 2)
Maudsley, H. (1868) Psychology and Pathology of the Mind, London. (1st ed.,
1867.) (650 n.)
Maury, L. F . A. (1853) ‘Nouvelles observations sur les analogies des phéno-
mènes du rêve et de l’aliénation mentale’, Pt. II, Ann. méd-psychol, 5,
404. (61, 121, 533–5)
(1878) Le sommeil et les rêves, Paris. (1st ed., 1861.) (42, 46, 50, 58–61,
65–6, 68–9, 87–9, 91–4, 97, 104–6, 109, 120, 121, 124, 222, 562 n.,
570, n. 1, 614)
*Meier, G. F . (1758) Versuch einer Erkdärung des Nachtwandelns, Halle. (57–8)
Meynert, T. (1892) Sammlung von populärwissenschaftlichen Vortràgen über
den Bau und die Leistungen des Gehirns, Vienna. (256, 284)
Miura, K. (1906) ‘Über japanische T raumdeutere’, Mitt. dtsch. Ges. Naturk.
Ostasiens, 10,291. (38, n. 2)
Moreau, J. (1855) ‘De l’identité de l’état de rêve et de folie’, Ann. méd.-
 psychol., 1,361. (121)
Müller , J.(1826) Vber die phantastischen G
esichtserscheinungen, Coblenz.
(65–6)
Myers, F . W. H. (1892) ‘Hypermnesic Dreams’, Proc. Soc. Psych. Res., 8,362.
(47)
Näcke, P . (1903) ‘Über sexuelle T räume’, Arch. Kriminalanthropol, 307. (431)
(1905) ‘Der T raum als feinstes Reagens f. d. Art d. sexuellen Empﬁndens’,
Monatschr. f. Krim.-Psychol., 2,500. (431)
(1907) ‘Kontrastträume und spez. sexuelle Kontrastträume’, Arch. Krimi-
nalanthropol., 24, 1. (431)641 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 641Näcke, P . (cont.)
(1908) ‘Beiträge zu den sexuellen T räumen’, Arch. Kriminalanthropol., 29,
363. (431)
(1911) ‘Die diagnostische und prognostische Brauchbarkeit der sex.
T räume’, Ärztl. Sachv.-Ztg., 2. (431)
Negelein, J. von (1912) ‘Der T raumschlüssel des Jaggadeva’, Relig. Gesch.
Vers., 11, 4. (38, n. 2)
Nelson, J. (1888) ‘A Study of Dreams’, Amer. J. Psychol., 1,367. (51)
Nordenskjöld, O. et al (1904) Antarctic. Zwei Jahre in Schnee und Eis am
Südpol, (2 vols.), Berlin. (164 n.)
[English trans, (abr.) : Antarctica, London, 1905.]
Pachantoni, D. (1909) ‘Der T raum als Urschprung von Wahnideen bei Al-
koholdelirianten’, Zbl. Nervenheilk., 32, 796. (120, n. 1)
Paulhan, F . (1894) ‘À propos de l’activité de l’esprit dans le rêve’; under
‘Correspondence’ in Rev. phil, 38,546. (540)
Peisse, L. (1857) La médecine et les médecins, Paris. (124)
Pfaff, E. R. (1868) Das Traumleben und seine Deutung nach den Prinzipien
der Araber, Perser, Griechen, Inder und Ägypter, Leipzig. (99)
Pﬁster, O. (1909) ‘Ein Fall von psychoanalytischer Seelsorge und Seelenhei-
lung’, Evangelische Freiheit, T ubingen. (439, n. 2)
(1911–12) ‘Die psychologische Enträtselung der religiösen Glossolalie und
der automatischen Kryptographie’, Jb. psychoanal, psychopath. Forsch., 3,
427 and 730. (392)
(1913) ‘Kryptolalie, Kryptographie und unbewusstes Vexierbild bei Nor-
malen’, Jb. psychoanal, und psychopath. Eorsch., 5,115. (392)
Pichon, A. E. (1896) Contribution à l’étude des délires oniriques ou délires de
rêve, Bordeaux. (120, n. 1)
Pilcz, A. (1899) ‘Über eine gewisse Gesetzmâssigkeit in den T räumen’, Au-
thor’s Abstract, Mschr. Psychiat. Neurol., 5,231, Berlin. (54)
Plato Republic. (99, 658)
[Trans, by B. Jowett (Dialogues, Vol. II), Oxford, 1871.]
Pohorilles, N. E. (1913) ‘Eduard von Hartmanns Gesetz der von unbewuss-
ten Zielvorstellungen geleiteten Assoziationen’, Int. Z. Psycho anal., 1,
605. (567 n.)
Pötzl, O. (1917) ‘E xperimentell err
egte T raumbilder in ihren Beziehungen
zum indirekten Sehen’, Z, ges. Neurol. Psychiat., 37,278. (214, n. 2)
Prince, Morton (1910) ‘The Mechanism and Interpretation of Dreams’, J.
abnorm. Psychol., 5, 139. (559)
Purkinje, J. E. (1846) ‘Wachen, Schlaf, T raum und verwandte Zustände’, R.
Wagner’s Handwörterbuch der Physiologie, 3,412, Brunswick. (115, 167)642 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 642Putnam, J. J. (1912) ‘Ein charakteristischer Kindertraum’, Zbl. Psycho anal.,
2,328. (164 n.)
*Raalte, F . van (1912) ‘Kinderdroomen’, Het Kind, Jan. (164 n.)
Radestock, P . (1879) Schlaf und Traum, Leipzig. (42, 68, 77–8, 88–9, 98,
103, 120–3, 167)
Rank, O. (1909) Der Mythus von der Geburt des Helden, Leipzig and Vienna.
(290 n., 436, n. 1.)
[Trans.: Myth of the Birth of the Hero, New York, 1913]
(1910) ‘Ein T raum der sich selbst deutet’, Jb. Psychoanal. psychopath.
Forsch., 2,465. (194 n., 271, n. 2, 345 n., 370, 384, n. 3, 433 n., 441)
(1911 a) ‘Beispiel eines verkappten Ödipustraumes’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1,
167. (433 n.)
(1911b ) ‘Belege zur Rettungsphantasie’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1,331. (439, n. 2)
(1911c ) ‘Zum Thema der Zahnreizträume’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1,408. (423–
27)
(1912a ) ‘Die Symbolschichtung im Wecktraum und ihre Wiederkehr im
mythischen Denken’, Jb. psychoanal. psychopath. Forsch., 4, 51. (253 n.,
271, n. 2, 387, n. 2, 402, 437–39)
(1912b ) ‘Aktuelle Sexualregungen als T raumanlässe’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2,
596. (271, n. 2)
(1912c ) Das Inzest-Motiv in Dichtung und Sage, Leipzig and Vienna. (290 n.)
(1913) ‘Eine noch nicht beschriebene Form des Ödipus-T raumes’, Int. Z.
Psychoanal., 1, 151. (433 n.)
(1914) ‘D ie “G
eburts-Rettungsphantasie” in T raum und Dichtung’, Int. Z.
Psychoanal., 2, 43. (439, n. 2)
Rank, O. , and Sachs, H. (1913) Die Bedeutung der Psychoanalyse für die Geis-
teswissenschaften, Wiesbaden. (386, n. 2)
[Trans.: The Signiﬁcance of Psychoanalysis for the Mental Sciences, New
York, 1915.]
Régis, E. (1894) ‘Les hallucinations oniriques ou du sommeil des dégénérés mys-
tiques’, Compte rendu Congrès Méd. Alién., 260, Paris, 1895. (120, n. 1)
Reik, T. (1911) ‘Zur Rettungssymbolik’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 1, 499. (439, n. 2)
(1915) ‘Gold und Kot’, Int. Z. Psychoanal, 3. , 183. (439)
Reitler, R. (1913a ) ‘Zur Augensymbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1,159. (433 n.)
(1913b ) ‘Zur Genital-und Sekret-Symbolik’, Int. Z. Psychoanal, 1,492.
(394)
Robert, W. (1886) Der Traum als Naturnotwendigkeit erklärt, Hamburg. (51,
110–3, 197, 210–1, 221, 618, 630)
Robitsek, A. (1912) ‘Zur Frage der Symbolik in dem T räumen Gesunder’,
Zbl. Psychoanal., 2., 340. (408–11)643 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 643Roffenstein, G. (1923) ‘Experimentelle Symbolträume’, Z. ges. Neurol. Psy-
chiat., 87, 362. (419)
R[orschach], H. (1912) ‘Zur Symbolik der Schlange und der Kravatte’, Zbl.
Psychoanal., 2, 675. (391, n. 1)
Sachs, H. (1911) ‘Zur Darstellungs-Technik des T raumes’, Zbl. Psycho anal.,
1,413. (445–46)
(1912) ‘T raumdeutung und Menschenkenntnis’, Jb. Psychoanal, psychopath.
Forsch., 3,568. (659)
(1913) ‘Ein T raum Bismarcks’, Int. Z. Psychoanal., 1, 80. (413–16)
(1914) ‘Das Zimmer als T raumdarstellung des Weibes’, Int. Z. Psycho anal.,
2,35. (390) See also Rank and Sachs.
Salomon, Almoli Ben Jacob (1637) Pithrôn Chalômôth, Amsterdam. (38, n . 2)
Sanctis, Sante de (1896) I sogni e il sonno nell’ islerismo e nella epilepsia,
Rome. (120)
(1897a) ‘Les maladies mentales et les rêves’, extrait des Ann. Soc. Méd. de
Gand, 76, 177. (120)
*(1897 b) ‘Sui rapporti d’identità, di somiglianza, di analogia e di equiva-
lenza fra sogno e pazzia’, Riv. quindicinale Psicol. Psichiàt. Neuropatol.,
Nov. 15. (120)
(1898a ) ‘Psychoses et rêves’, Rapport au Congrès de neurol. et d’hypnologie
de Bruxelles 1897; Comptes rendus, 1, 137. (120)
(1898b ) ‘I sogni dei neuropatici e dei pazzi’, Arch, psichiat. antrop. crim.,
19,342. (120) (1899) I sogni, Turin. (121, 125) 
[German transi, by O. Schmidt, Halle, 1901.]
Scherner, K. A. (1861) Das Leben des Traumes, Berlin. (70–1, 115–19, 165
n., 258–61, 370, 381, 388, 394 n., 438, 585, 630, 651)
Schleiermacher, F . (1862) Psychologie, (Vol. 6, Sec. 3 in Collected Works, ed.
L. George), Berlin. (82, 103, 134)
Scholz, F . (1887) Schlaf und Traum, Leipzig. (54, 90, 99, 168) 
[Trans.: Sleep and Dreams by H. M. Jewett, New York, 1893.]
Schopenhauer, A. (1862) ‘Versuch über das Geistersehen und was damit
 zusammenhängt’, Parerga und Paralipomena (Essay V), 1,213, 2nd ed.,
Be
rlin. (1st ed. 1851.) (70, 98, 122)
Schrötter, K. (1912) ‘Experimentelle T räume’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2,638. (419)
Schubert, G. H. von (1814) Die Symbolik des Traumes, Bamberg. (96, 387)
Schwarz, F . (1913) ‘T raum und T raumdeutung nach “Abdalgan an- Nabulusi”’,
Z. deutsch. morgenl. Ges., 67,473. (38, n . 2)
Secker, F . (1909–10) ‘Chinesische Ansichten über den T raum’, Neue metaph.
Rndschr., 17, 101. (38, n. 2)
Siebeck, H. (1877) ‘Das T raumleben der Seele’, Sammlung gemeinverständ-
licher Vorträge, Berlin. (90)644 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 644Silberer, H. (1909) ‘Bericht über eine Methode, gewisse symbolische Hal-
luzinations-Erscheinungen hervorzurufen und zu beobachten’, Jb.
psycho anal, psychopath. Forsch., 1, 513. (82, n . 1, 134, n . 2, 379–80,
413, 448 n., 541–3)
(1910) ‘Phantasie und Mythos’, Jb. psychoanal, psychopath. Forsch., 2,541.
(134, n. 2, 248, n. 3)
(1912) ‘Symbolik des Erwachens und Schwellensymbolik überhaupt’, Jb.
psychoanal, psychopath. Forsch., 3,621. (134, n. 2,541–3, 598)
(1914) Probleme der Mystik und Hirer Symbolik, Vienna and Leipzig. (562)
Simon, P . M. (1888) Le monde des rêves, Paris. (63, 67–8, 72, 167)
*Sperber, H. (1912) ‘Über den Einﬂuss sexueller Momente auf Entstehung
und Entwicklung der Sprache’, Imago, 1, 405. (387 n.)
Spielrein, S. (1913) ‘T raum von “Pater Freudenreich”’, Int. Z. Psychoanal.,
1,484. (164 n.)
Spitta, K. (1882) Die Schlaf-und Traumzustände der mensch-lichen Seele, Tu -
bingen. (1st ed., 1878.) (68, 80, 83, 88, 89–92, 96, n. 1, 98–9, 102,
104, 120, 122, 255, 551)
Spitteler, C. (1914) Meine frühesten Erlebnisse, Jena. (194 n., 285, n. 2)
Stannius, H. (1849) Das peripherische Nervensystem der Fische, anatomisch
und physiologisch untersucht, Rostock. (448, 489, n. 1)
Stärcke, A. (1911) ‘Ein T raum der das Gegenteil einer Wunscherfullung zu
verwirklichen schien’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2,86. (192)
Stärcke, J. (1913) ‘Neue T raumexperimente in Zusammenhang mit älteren
und neueren T raumtheorien’, Jb. psychoanal, psychopath. Forsch., 5,233.
(94, 165, n. 2)
Stekel, W. (1909) ‘Beiträge zur T raumdeutung’, Jb. psycho-anal, psychopath.
Forsch., 1,458. (310, 373, 384, n. 3, 392–4, 397 n., 398 n., 415)
(1911) Die S prache des Traumes, Wiesbaden. (385, 392–4, 420, n. 1, 432, 446)
S
tricker, S. (1879) Studien ﬁber das Bewusstsein, Vienna. (90, 106, 497)
Strümpell, A. von (1883–84) Lehrbuch der speciellen Pathologie und Thera-
pie der inneren Krankheiten, Leipzig. (56)
[Trans.: T ext-book of Medicine, (2 vols.), 4th Amer. Ed., New York, 1912.]
Strümpell, L. (1877) Die Natur und Enstehung der Träume, Leipzig. (41, 49,
52, 54–5, 62–3, 67, 71–2, 76–9, 83, 86–7, 89–91, 110, 215, 255–6,
260, 268, 497)
Stumpf, E. J. G. (1899) Der Traum und seine Deutung, Leipzig. (132, n . 1)
Sully, J. (1893) ‘The Dream as a Revelation’, Fortnightly Rev., 53,354. (93,
168, n. 2, 540, 630)
Swoboda, H. (1904) Die Perioden des Menschlichen Organis-mus, Vienna.
(126, 199, 419)
Tannery, M. P . (1898) ‘Sur la mémoire dans le rêve’, Rev. phil., 45,637. (551 n .)645 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 645Tausk, V. (1913) ‘Zur Psychologie der Kindersexualitäf, Int. Z. Psycho anal.,
1,444. (164 n., 339]
(1914) ‘Kleider und Farben im Dienste der T raumdarstel-lung’, Int. Z. Psy-
choanal., 2, 464. (446)
Tﬁnkdji, J. (1913) ‘Essai sur les songes et l’art de les interpréter (onirocritie)
en Mésopotomie’, Anthropos, 8,505. (38, n. 2, 139, n. 2)
Thomayer, S. and Simerka (1897) ‘Sur la signiﬁcation de quelques rêves’,
Rev. neurol., 5, 98. (121)
Tissié, P . (1898) Les rêves, physiologie et pathologie, Paris. (1st ed., 1870.) (68,
69–70, 7–5, 78, 120–1, 167)
Tobowolska, J. (1900) Etude sur les illusions de temps dans les rêves du sommeil
normal, (Thesis) Paris. (97, n. 1, 536, 540–1) 
See also  Bernard-Leroy and Tobowolska.
Varendonck, J. (1912) The Psychology of Day-Dreams, London. (529, n . 3)
Vaschide, N. (1911) Le sommeil et les rêves, Paris. (45 n., 47, 94, 611)
Vespa, B. (1897) ‘Il sonno e i sogni nei neuro-e psicopatici’, Boll. Soc. Lanci-
siana Osp., 17, 193. (120, n. 1)
Vold, J. Mourly (1896) ‘Expériences sur les rêves et en particulier sur ceux
d’origine musculaire et optique’ (review), Rev. phil., 42,542. (72)
(1910–12) Vber den Traum (2 vols.) ( German transl, by O. Klemm), Leip-
zig. (73 n., 256, n. 2, 430)
Volkelt, J. (1875) Die traum-Phantasie, Stuttgart. (50, 70, 74, 88, 91–2, 98,
103, 115–18, 168, 258–60, 381)
Weed, S. See Hallam and Weed.
Weygandt, W. (1893) Entstehung der Träume, Leipzig. (42, 59, 69, 75, 91,
157 n .)
Whiton Calkins. See Calkins, Whiton .
Wiggam, A. (1909) ‘A Contribution to the Data of Dream Psychology’, Ped.
Sem. J. Genet. Psychol., 16,250. (164 n.)
Winterstein, A. v
on(1912) ‘Zwei Belege fur die Wunscher-füllung im
T raume’, Zbl. Psychoanal., 2,292. (42)
Wittels, F . (1924) Sigmund Freud: der Mann, die Lehre, die Schule, Vienna.
(247, n. 3, 458 n.)[Trans.: Sigmund Freud: his Personality, his T eaching and his School, by
Eden and Cedar Paul, London, 1924.]
(1931) Freud and his Time (trans, by Louise Brink), New York. (477 n.)
Wundt, W. (1874) Grundzüge der physiologischen Psychologie, Leipzig. (62,
64, 74–5, 90–1, 122, 256–7, 268)
Zeller, A. (1818) ‘Irre’, Ersch and Gruber: Allgemeine Encyclopedie der Wis-
senschaften, 24,120. (102)}646 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 646B
LIST OF OTHER WORKS ON DREAMS 
PUBLISHED BEFORE THE YEAR 1900
[These are works included in Freud’s Bibliographies but not referred to in
the text. ]
Ahmad Ibn Sirin, Achmetis f. Seirim Oneirocriticae, ed. N. Rigaltius,  Paris,
1603.
*Alberti, Michael (1744) Diss. de insomniorum inﬂuxi in sanitatem et mor-
bos. Resp. Titius Halae M
Alix (1883) ‘Les rêves’, Rev. Sci. Industr. 3rd series, 6, 554.
*Anon (1890) ‘Rêves et l’hypnotisme’, Le Monde, Aug. 25.
*(1890) ‘Science of Dreams’, The Lyceum, p. 28, Dublin.
(1893) ‘The Utility of Dreams’, J. Comp. Neurol, 3, 17, Granville.
Bacci, Domenico (1857) Sui sogni e sul sonnambulismo, pensiero ﬁsiologico-
metaﬁsici, Venice.
Ball, B. (1885) La morphinomanie, les rêves prolongés, Paris.
Benezé, Emil (1897) ‘Das T raummotiv in der mittelhoch-deutschen Dich-
tung bis 1250 und in alten deutschen Volksliedern’, Benezé: Sageng.
und lit.-hist. Unters, 1, Das Traummotiv, Halle.
*Benini, V. (1898) ‘Nel moneto dei sogni’, Il Pensiero nuovo, Apr.
*Birkmaier, Hieron (1715) Licht im Finsterniss der nächt-lichen Gesichte und
Träume, Nuremberg.
Bisland, E. (1896) ‘Dreams and their Mysteries’, N. Am. Rev. 162, 716.
Bradley, F . H. (1894) ‘On the Failure of Movement in Dream’, Mind, (new
series), 3, 373, London.
Brander, R. (1884) Der Schlaf und das Traumleben, Leipzig.
Bremer, L. (1893) ‘T raum und Krankheit’, New York med. Monatschr., 5,281.
*Bussola, Seraﬁno (1834) De somnüs, (Thesis) Ticini Reg.
*Caetani-Lovatelli (1889) ‘I sogni e l’ipnotismo nel mondo antico’, Nuova
AnloL, Dec. 1.
Cane, Frances E. (1889) ‘The Physiology of Dreams’, The Lancet, 67 II,
1330 (Dec. 28)
Cardano, Girolamo (1562) Somiorum synesiorum, omnis generis insomnia
explicantes libri IV, Bale. (2nd ed. in Opera omnia Cardani, 5,593,
Lyons, 1663.)647 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 647Cariero, Alessandro (1575) De somnüs deque divinatione per somnia,
 Padua.
Carpenter (1849–52) ‘Dreaming’ (under ‘Sleep’), Cyclop, of Anat. and Physiol.,
4,687, London.
Clavière (1897) La rapidité de la pensée dans le rêve, Rev. phil., 43,507.
Coutts, G. A. (1896) ‘Night-terrors’, Amer. J. med. Sc. D. L. (1895) ‘A pro-
pos de l’appréciation du temps dans le rêve, Rev. phil., 40,69.
Dagonet, H. (1889) ‘Du rêve et du délire alcoolique’, Ann. méd.- psychol., Se-
ries 7, 10, 193.
Dandolo, G. (1889) La conscienza nel sogno, Padua.
Dechambre, A. (1880) ‘Cauchemar’, Dict, encycl. sc. méd., 2,48.
*Dietrich, J. D. (1726) An ea, quae hominibus in somno et somnio accidunt,
üsdem possint imputari? resp. Gava, Wittemberg.
*Dochmasa, A. M. (1890) Dreams and their Signiﬁcance as Forebodings of Di-
sease, Kazan.
Dreher, E. (1890) ‘Sinneswahrnehmung und T raumbild’, Reichs-med. An-
zeiger, 15,Nos. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24; 16, Nos. 3, 8, Leipzig.
Ducosté, M. (1899) ‘Les songes d’attaques des épileptiques’, Journ. Méd.
Bordeaux, Nov. 26 and Dec. 3.
*Du Prel, C. (1869) ‘Oneirokritikon: der T raum vom Stand-punkte des
transcend. Idealismus’, Deutsche Vierteljahr-schrift, 2,Stuttgart.
(1880) Psychologie der Lyrik, Leipzig.
*(1889) ‘Künstliche T räume’, Sphinx, July.
Egger, V. (1888) ‘Le sommeil et la certitude, le sommeil et la mémoire’, Cri-
tique philos., 1, 341, Paris.
Elus, Havelock (1895) ‘On Dreaming of the Dead’, Psychol. Rev. 2,458.
(1897) ‘A Note on hypnagogic Paramnesia’, Mind, 6,283.
Erdmann, J. E. (1855) ‘Das T räumen’, Ernste Spiele, Chap. 12, Berlin.
Erk, Vinz. von (1874) Über den Unterschied von Traum und Wachen, Prague.
*Escande de Messières (1895) ‘Les rêves chez les hystériques’, (Thesis)
 Bordeaux.
Faure (1876) ‘Études sur les rêves morbides. Rêves persistants’, Arch,  génér.
Méd., 6th ser., 27,550.
*Enizia (1896) ‘L’azione suggestiv
a delie cause esterne nei sogni’, Arch, per
I’Antrop., 26.
*Féré, C. (1897) ‘Les rêves d’accès chez les épileptiques’, Méd. mod. Dec. 8.
*Fischer, Joh. (1899) Ad artis veterum onirocriticae historiam symbole, (The-
sis) Jena.
*Florentin, V. (1899) ‘Das T raumleben: Plauderei’, Die alte und die neue
Welt, 33,725.648 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 648Fornaschon, H. (1897) ‘Die Geschichte eines T raumes als Beitrag der
T ranscendentalpsychologie’, Psychische Studien, 24,274.
Frensberg. (1885) ‘Schlaf und T raum’, Sammlung gemein-verst. wiss. Vortr.,
Virchow-Holtzendorf, Ser. 20, 466.
Frerichs, J. H. (1866) Der Mensch: Traum, Herz, Verstand, Norden.
Galen. De praecognitione, ad Epigenem, Lyons, 1540.
*Girgensohn, L. (1845) Der Traum: psychol.-physiol. Versuch.
*Gleichen-Russwurm, A. von (1899) T raum in der Dich-tung’, Nat. Z.,
Nos. 553–559.
*Gley, E. (1898) ‘Appréciation du temps pendant le sommeil’, L’intermé-
diaire des Biologistes, 10, 228.
Gorton, D. A. (1896) ‘Psychology of the Unconscious’, Amer. Med. Times,
24,33, 37.
Gould, G. M. (1889) ‘Dreams, Sleep, and Consciousness’, The Open Court
(Chicago), 2, 1433–6 and 1444–7.
*Grabener, G. C. (1710) Ex antiquitate judaica de menûdim bachalôm siv ex-
communicatis per insomnia exerc. resp. Klebius, Wittemberg.
Graffunder, P . C. (1894) ‘T raum und T raumdeutung,’ Samml. gemeinv.
wiss. Vorträge, 197.
Greenwood, F . (1894) Imaginations in Dreams and their Study, London.
*Grot, N. (1878) Dreams, a Subject of Scientiﬁc Analysis (in Russian), Kiev.
Guardia, J. M. (1892) ‘La personnalité dans les rêves’, Rev. Phil, 34,225.
Gutfeldt, I. (1899) ‘Ein T raum’, Psychol. Studien, 26,491.
*Hampe, T. (1896) ‘Uber Hans Sachsen T raumgedichte’, Z. deutsch. Unter-
richt, 10, 616.
Heerwagen (1889) ‘Statist Untersuch. über T räumme u. Schlaf ’, Philos.
Stud., 5, 301.
Hiller, G. (1899) ‘T raum, Ein Kapitel zu den zwölf Nächten’, Leipz. T agbl.
und Anz., No. 657, Suppl. 1.
Httschmann, F . (1894) ‘Über das T raumleben der Blinden*, Z. PsychoL, 7,
387.
Jastrow, J. (1888) The Dreams of the Blind’, New Princeton Rev., 5, 18.
Jensen, J. (1871) T räumen und Denken’, Samml. gemeinv. wiss. Vortr., Vir-
chow-H
oltzendorff, Ser. 6, 134.
Kingsford, A. (1888) Dreams and Dream-Stories, (ed. E. Maitland), Lon-
don. (2nd ed.)
Kloepfel, F . (1899) T räumerei and T raum: Allerlei aus unserem T raumle-
ben’, Universum, 15,2469 and 2607.
*Kramar, Oldrich (1882) O spànku a snu, Prager Akad. Gymn.
Krasnicki, E. von (1897) ‘Karls IV Wahrtraum’, Psych Stud., 24,697.649 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 649Kucera, E. (1895) ‘Aus dem T raumleben’, Mähr-Weisskirchen, Gymn.
Laistner, L. (1889) Das Rätsel der Sphinx, (2 vols.), Berlin.
*Landau, M. (1892) ‘Aus dem T raumleben’, Münchner Neueste Nachrichten,
Jan. 9.
Laupts. (1895) ‘Le fonctionnement cérébral pendant le rêve et pendant le
sommeil hypnotique’, Ann. méd.-psychol., Ser. 8, 2, 354.
*Leidesdorf, M. (1880) ‘Das T raumleben’, Sammlung der ‘Aima Mater’,
Vienna.
*Lerch, M. F . (1883–84) ‘Das T raumleben und sein Bedeu-tung’, Gymn.
Progr., Komotau.
*Liberali, Francesco (1834) Dei sogni, (Thesis) Padua.
Liébeault, A. (1893) ‘A travers les états passifs, le sommeil et les rêves’, Rev.
hypnot., 8, 41, 65, 106.
Luksch, L. ( 1894) Wunderbare Traumerfüllung als Inhalt des wirklichen Le-
bens, Leipzig.
Macario, M. M. A. (1846) ‘Des rêves, considérés sous le rapport physiolo-
gique et pathologique’, Pt. I, Ann. méd-psychol., 8, 170.
(1889) ‘Des rêves morbides’, Gaz. méd. de Paris, 8, 1, 85, 97, 109, 121.
Macfarlane, A. W. (1890) ‘Dreaming’, Edinb. med. J., 36, 499.
Maine de Biran, M. F . P . (1792) ‘Nouvelles Considérations sur le sommeil,
les songes, et le sonnambulisme’, Œuvres Philosophiques, 209 (Ed. V.
Cousin), Paris, 1841.
Maury, L. F . A. (1857) ‘De certains faits observés dans les rêves’, Ann. méd.-
psychol., Ser. 3, 3, 157.
*Meisel (pseud.) (1783) Natürlich-göitliche und teuﬂische Träume, Seighart-
stein.
Melinand, M. C. (1898) ‘Dream and Reality,” Pop. Sc. Mo., 54,96.
Melzentin, C. (1899) ‘Über wissenschaftliche T raumdeu-tung’, Gegenwart,
50,Leipzig.
Mentz, R. (1888) Die Träume in den altfranzösischen Karls-und Artusepen,
Marburg.
Monroe, W. S. (1899) ‘A study of taste-dreams’, Am. I. Psychol., 10, 326.
Moreau de La Sarthe, J. L. (1820) ‘Rêve’, Dict. sc. méd., 48,245.
Motet (1829–36) ‘Cauchemar’, Dict, méd, chir. pratiques, Paris.
Murray, J. C. (1894) ‘D o w e ever dream of tasting?’ Proc. Am. psychol. Ass.,
20.
*Nagele, A. (1889) ‘Der T raum in der epischen Dichtung’, Programm der
Realschule, Marburg.
Newbold, W. R. (1896) ‘Sub-conscious Reasoning’, Proc. Soc. psychic. Res.,
12,11, London.650 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 650Passavanti, J. (1891) Libro dei sogni, Rome.
Paulhan, F . (1894) ‘A propos de l’activité de l’esprit dans le rêve’, Rev. phil,
38,546.
Pick, A. (1896) ‘Über pathologische T räumerei und ihre Bezie-hungen zur
Hysterie’, Jb. Psychiat., 14, 280.
*Ramm, K. (1889) Diss. pertractans somnia, Vienna.
*Régis, E. (1890) ‘Les rêves Bordeaux’, La Gironde (Variétés), May 31.
Richard, Jerome (1766) La théorie des songes, Paris.
Richardson, B. W. (1892) ‘The Physiology of Dreams’, Asclep., 9, 129.
Richier, E. (1816) Onéirologie ou dissertation sur les songes, considérés dans
l’état de maladie, (Thesis) Paris.
*Richter, J. P . (Jean Paul) (1813) ‘Blicke in die T raum-welf, Museum, 2,
(also in Werke, ed. Hempel, 44, 128.)
*‘Über Wahl-und Halbträume’ , Werke, 44,142.
(1826–33) Wahrheit aus Jean Pauls Leben.
Robinson, L. (1893) ‘What Dreams are made of, N. Am. Rev., 157, 687.
Rousset, C. (1876) Contribution à l’étude du cauchemar, (Thesis) Paris.
Roux, J. (1898) ‘Le rêve et les délires onitiques’, Province méd. Lyons, 12,
212.
*Ryff, W. H. (1554) Traumbüchlein, Strassburg.
*Santel, A. (1874) ‘Poskus raz kladbe nekterih pomentjivih prokazni spanja
in sanj’, Progr. Gymn., Görz.
Sarlo, F . de (1887) I sogni. Saggio psicologico, Naples.
Sch. Fr. (1897) ‘Etwas über T räume’, Psych. Studien, 24,686.
Schleich, K. L. (1899) ‘Schlaf und T raum’, Zukunjt, 29,14, 54.
Schwartzkopff, P . (1887) Das Leben im Traum: eine Studie, Leipzig.
Stevenson, R. L. (1892) ‘A Chapter on Dreams’, Across the Plain.
Stryk, M. von (1899) ‘Der T raum und die Wirklichkeit’, (after C. Méli-
nand), Baltische Mschr., 189, Riga.
Sull
y, J.(1881) Illusions, a Psychological Study, London.
(1882) ‘Etudes sur les rêves’, Rev. scientif., Ser. 3, 3, 385.
(1892) The Human Mind, (2 vols.), London.
(1875–89) ‘Dreams’, Enc. Brit., 9th ed.
Summers, T. O. (1895) ‘The Physiology of Dreaming’, St . Louis Clin., 8,401.
Surbled, G. (1895) ‘Origine des rêves’, Rev. quest, scient. (1898) Le rêve, Paris.
Synesius of Syrene Liber de insomnüs.
[German trans.: Oneiromantik by Krauss, Vienna, 1888.]
Tannery, M. P . (1894) “Sur l’activité de l’esprit dans le rêve’, Rev. phil., 38,
630.
(1898) ‘Sur la paramnésie dans les rêves’, Rev. phil., 46,420.651 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 651Thiéry, A. (1896) ‘Aristote et la psychologie physiologique du rêve’, Rev.
neo-scol., 3, 260.
*Thomayer, S. (1887) ‘Contributions to the Pathology of Dreams’ (in
Czech), Policlinic of the Czech University, Prague.
Tissié, P . (1896) ‘Les rêves; rêves pathogènes et thérapeutiques; rêves photo-
graphiés’, Journ. méd. Bordeaux, 36,293, 308, 320.
Titchener, E. B. (1895) ‘Taste Dreams’, Am. J. Psychol., 6, 505.
Tonnini, S. (1887) ‘Suggestione e sogni’, Arch, psichiatr. antrop. crim., 8, 264
*Tonsor, J. H. (1627) Disp. de vigilia, somno et somniis, prop. Lucas,
 Marburg.
T uke, D. H. (1892) ‘Dreaming’, Dict, of Psychol. Med. (ed. T uke),  London.
Ullrich, M. W. (1896) Der Schlaf und das Traumleben, Geisteskraft und Geis-
tesschwäche, (3rd ed.), Berlin.
Unger, F. (1898) ‘Die Magie des Traumes als Unsterblich-keitsbeweis. Nebst e. Vor-
wort: Okkultismus und Sozial-ismus von C. du Prel, (2nd ed.), Münster.
Vignoli, T. (1879) Mito e scienza: Saggio, Milan.
[Trans.: Myth and Science: An Essay, London, 1882 (Chap. VIII).]
*Vischer, F . T. (1876) ‘Studien über den T raum’, Beilage allg. Z., 105.
Vold, J. Mourly (1897) ‘Einige Expérimente über Gesichts-bilder im
T raume’, Report of 3rd. Psych. Congr., Munich, and Z. Psychol. Physiol.
Sinnerorgane, 13,66.
*Vykoukal, F . V. (1898) On Dreams and Dream-interpretations, (in Czech)
Prague.
Wedel, R. (1899) ‘Untersuchungen auslandischer Gelehrter über gew.
T raumphanomene’, Beitr. zur Grenzwissenschaft, p. 24.
*Wehr, H. (1887) ‘Das Unbewusste im menschlichen Denken’, Programm
der Oberrealschule, Klagenfurt.
Weill, A. (1872) Qu’est-ce que le rêve? Paris.
*Wendt, K. (1858) Kriemhilds Traum, (Thesis) Rostock.
Wilks, S. (1893–94) ‘On the Nature of Dreams’, Med. Mag., 2,597, London.
Williams, H. S. (1891–92) ‘The Dream State and its Psychic Correlatives,
Amer. J. Insanity, 48, 445.
Woodworth, R. S. (1897) ‘Note on the Rapidity of Dreams’, Psychol. Rev .,
4,524.
*(1886) ‘Ce qu’on peut rêver en cinq secondes’, 
Rev. sc, 3rd. ser., 11,572.
Zuccarelli (1894–95) ‘Polluzioni notturne ed epilepsia’, L’anomalo , 1, 2, 3.652 Bibliography9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 652Anna Freud’s wish for strawberries,
154–155
Anxiety dream, 581–582
Augean stables, 475–477Autodidasker, 315–319, 497–498
Bisexuality theory, 346–347
Botanical monograph, 193–197,
299–302, 322, 473
Children, birth of, 484Children, excursions with, 152–153Children, satisfaction with, 
454–455
Death and memorial of friends
(Non vixit), 430–434, 485–490, 517–518
Death of his father, 333–334, 
436–437, 444–447, 455
Disagreeable fellow travelers
[change carriea], 522
Dishonesty, 351–352
Etruscan urn, 149
Evisceration, 459–462, 482
Functional phenomena, 507–508Goethe’s attack on Herr M., 342,
447–449, 456–457
Graves’ disease, 287–288, 556Horseback riding, 249–252Irma’s injection, 131–145, 161,
309–313, 323, 332, 338, 356,
517, 537
Lamp carried by colleague, 191
Neologisms, 313, 315–320Pope’s death, 252
Proper names in dreams, 422Punishment dream, 481–482
Recent events as source of, 188–189
Rome, 215–219, 449–452
Schoolmaster and doctor, 50
Son as a gallant soldier, 558–560Stairs, inhibited movement on,
257–259, 265
Telegram, 333Thirst dreams, 149INDEX OF DREAMS
653A
FREUD’S OWN DREAMS9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 653Three Fates, 225–229, 252–253
Thun, Count, 229–239, 440–442Town council, 444–447, 457–459T rain carriages, changing, 462–466T ravel to Florence, 190Warships near the castle by the sea,
470–473
Yellow-bearded uncle, 162–166,
310–311, 322, 338, 478, 569654 Index of Dreams
B
Other People’s Dreams
Anxiety dreams, 582–585Arrest fantasy, 498–500
Barrel-maker’s boys, 222–223
Bismarck’s riding whip, 388–392Blossoming branch, 335, 340, 
361–363
Bonjour’s fantasy of the theater,
502–503
Books in a trunk, 210Buildings, stairs, and shafts, 
377–378
Burning child, 513–515, 536, 570
Calculations in, 425–427
Candles in a candlestick, 
209–210
Castration dreams, 379, 421‘Channel’ joke, 521–522Chemist’s masturbation dream,
393–394
Children, death of, 176–180, 
469–470
Children, excursions with, 153–154Clothing and colors, 421Composite localities, 341Cooling apparatus on her face,
150–151
Death as the great Unknown, 
478–479Delboeuf’s Asplenium dream, 
45–46
Dental dream, 399–403
Father, death of, 434–437
Feeling of reality and representation
of repetition, 383–385
Food that is unavailable, 285–286
Genitals and intercourse, symbols
of, 375–376
Ghosts, 546–547
Green faces and red eyes, 546Guillotine dream, 58–59, 93, 
500–502, 574
Hat symbolism, 373–375Hervey’s dream of a golden-haired
woman, 47
‘Innocent’ dreams, 220–221, 
407–408, 429
Intra-uterine experience and birth
symbolism, 410
Judgement against another’s 
fiancee, 552
Language of Flowers, 331–332Lilies of the valley, 453–454Lions in the desert, 468–4699780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 654Market, late to the, 206–207
May-beetle dream, 307–309Money and numbers, 423–425Mother-in-law’s visit, 175–176Myops, 286, 451
Neologisms, 314, 321
Numbers, 424–425
Oedipus dreams, 409n
Opera dreams, 356–358, 
396–398, 443
Orthopedic institute, 221–222
Paper hat, 422–423
Patient’s obstacle to continuing
treatment, 181–182
People and landscapes as sexual
symbols, 379
Piano, worthlessness of, 208Policeman dream, 426–427Praise of ‘Brugnolus,’ 46Pregnant servant girl, 347Puns and turns of speech, 415–423,
429–430
Rosegger’s hypocritical dream, 
479–481
Rushing and falling, 220–221,
223–224, 271
Sappho dream, 302–307, 
322, 342
Sensory stimuli as dream material,
55–60
Staircase dreams, 380–385Supper-party, 171–173Symbolism in the dreams of normal
persons, 385–388
Unintentional revelation of 
liaison, 454
Unmodified occurrences, 53–54
Weak spots in, 519
Winter overcoat, 208–209655 Index of Dreams9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 6559780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 656GENERAL INDEX
Absurdity, 354, 356–358, 425
dreams of a father’s death, 
434–437
Freud’s dream of Goethe’s attack
on Herr M., 456–457
Freud’s dream of his father’s
death, 444–447, 455
Freud’s dream of Rome, 
449–452
in dream-thought elements, 
442–443, 452–453
number play in Freud’s dream of
Goethe, 447–449
Accelerating the course of dreams,
571
Accidents in dreams, 54
Adam Bede (Eliot), 307–308
Affect, 267
anxiety dreams, 580apparent absence of, 468–473content and, 466–468distortion in dreams, 165–166,
169
Freud’s evisceration dream, 482punishment dream, 481–482,
484–485
reversal of, 477–479suppression of, 473–477
Affection, 169Age, 418–419, 446–447Alcoholism, dreams and, 114–115Alexander of Macedon, 124–125nAmbition, 162, 213–215, 237–238Ancient civilizations
Artemidorus’s study of dream
interpretation, 123n
demonic and divine nature of
dreams, 36–38
dream-books, 124–125nhistorical significance of dreams,
608–609
in dream content, 218–219moral sense in dreams, 95nakedness and inhibition, 265Oedipus dreams, 278–281, 
408–409n
theory of dreams, 102therapeutic value of dreams, 65nwaking life, dependence of dream
content on, 42–43
wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 157n,
159n, 569
Andersen, Hans Christian, 261–262Animals, 212, 249–251
dreams by, 155, 157, 157nlions, 468–469May-beetle dream, 307–308wordplay on, 415
Anti-semitism, 161n, 162–164,
218–219, 233–234
Antiquity. See Ancient civilizations
Anxiety dreams, 160
dreams of the death of a loved
one, 284
6579780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 657Anxiety dreams (cont.)
emission dreams, 412–413
examination (test-taking) dreams,
291–293
falling, 405Freud’s dream of the death and
memorial of friends, 486–487
function of, 578–585illness, 66inhibited movement, 352inhibition dreams, 257–259intra-uterine experience and
birth symbolism, 410
nakedness, 265postponed interpretation of, 525robbers, burglars, and ghosts, 414wish-fulfilment, 183–185, 256
Apples, 304–305Arab dream interpreters, 123–124nAristotle, 36–37, 65, 122nArousal during dreaming, 575–576Arrest fantasy, 498–500Arsenic, 307–309Artabanus, 42Artemidorus of Daldis, 37–38, 123,
123n–125n
Association, xiv, 71, 242
botanical monograph dream,
301–302
condensation of dream-thought,
298
displacement, 324
Associative dreams, 71–72Auditory images and stimuli, 64,
79, 244
Auto-symbolic substitutes for
thought, 359–360
Automobiles, 419Awareness of dreaming, 570–571
Bedwetting, 237, 383, 405, 414
Beetles, 307–309Belief: reality of dream-image and,
80–81Bells, 60, 252, 314–315Benini, V., 75, 98Bernard, Claude, 526Biblical dreams and figures, 349,
391–392
Binz, C., 52, 85, 103Biographical dreams, 362Birth dreams, 410–412, 411n, 
413–414
Bisexual symbols, 372Bisexuality, 346–347, 407, 569Bismarck, Otto von, 389–392Bodily functions, 237–238, 
245–247, 412. See alsoEmission dreams; Urination
Bonatelli, F ., 75Bonjour, Casimir, 502Books, forbidden, 308Botanical material, 45–46, 213,
233–235, 340, 361–363,385–388, 453–454
Botanical monograph, 193–197,
299–302, 322, 473
Boxes in dreams, 178, 416Breakfast-ship, 472–473Breuer, Josef, 125–126, 487nBrücke, Ernst, xvi, 487–488, 
487n, 489
Buildings and places in dreams, 48,
377–379
Burdach, K. F ., 41, 80, 105, 
108–109, 244
Cab, 440–442Caesar, Julius, 408–409nCake, 359Calculations, 425–427, 427nCalkins, Mary Whiton, 242Camellias, 335, 340, 362Candles, 209–210Castration, 376, 379, 397–398n,
408–409n, 421–422n
Causal relations between 
dream-thoughts, 331–332658 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 658Caviare, 172–173, 341, 450
Censorship, 611–612
affect and, 468, 485chronological relations of 
dream-processes, 574–575
death of a person of whom the
dreamer is fond, 271
distortion disguising 
wish-fulfilment, 167–168,167n, 183
dreams as a wish to prolong
sleep, 254–255
dreams of death of a loved 
one, 284
forbidden books, 308Freud’s dream of friends’ death
and memorial, 490–491
Freud’s self-analysis, 235–236intensity and value of 
dream-images, 345
representability and, 354–355representation through
identification, 337–338
reversals, 343revision, 518–520secondary revision, 494superficial associations, 
533–535
suppression of affect, 474–475through displacement, 325–326,
325n
wish-fulfilment and, 551
Cessation of dreams, 82–84Characteristics of dreams,
psychological, 77–93
Childhood experience
as source of dreams, 211–240Augean Stables dream, 476bedwetting, 405–406Bismarck’s dream, 391–392bodily functions, 221–223botanical dreams, 195–196characteristics of memory in
dreams, 188death-wishes against parents,
276–278
dream formation process, 
566–567, 586
flying and falling, 288–290, 403Freud’s botanical monograph
dream, 300
Freud’s dishonesty dream, 352nFreud’s dream content, 225–229Freud’s dream of friends’ 
deaths, 433
gigantic figures, 62nimportance in dream-thoughts
and content, 547–548
indifferent material in dreams,
188n, 195–196
infantile roots of unconscious
wishes, xviii
‘innocent’ dreams, 223–224intra-uterine experience and
birth symbolism, 410
Language of Flowers, 331–332latent content of dreams, 
239–240
memory as source of dream
material, 48–49, 54
nakedness and inhibition, 265sexual assault, 207–208sexual episodes, 219–220, 
236–238
staircase dream, 381–382unification of material, 248wet-nurse memories, 226, 
305–306, 306n
women’s experiences, 220–222
Children
affect and content, 467nanxiety dreams, 160birth of Freud’s, 484castration dreams, 379death-wishes against parents,
273–276, 284–288, 344
death-wishes against siblings,
267–273659 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 659Children (cont.)
distortion disguising wish-
fulfilment, 176–180
dreams of the death of, 469–470,
513–515, 536
flying and falling, 288–290
Freud’s concerns about the
upbringing of, 317, 319
Freud’s dream of Irma’s
injection, 310
Freud’s dream of Rome, 449–452Freud’s satisfaction with, 454–455illegitimate, 453–454nakedness, 262–263pregnancy, dreams announcing,
151–152
Shakespeare’s treatment of, 283symbolizing genitalia, 375–376symbols of a mother’s drive to
have, 386–387
transference of love to, 491–492wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 
151–156n, 553
Choice of memories, 51–52Chronological relations of dream-
processes, 574–575
Chronological reversals, 343, 412Cicero, 43Clarity, 346–350, 453–454Clocks, 60Clothing in dreams, 69, 225, 228,
257–266, 341, 420–421. SeealsoNakedness in dreams
Coal, 356–357Cocaine, 135–136, 140–141, 
194–197, 228, 238, 299–300
Coenaesthesia, 67–68, 75, 243, 256Collaterals, 327–328nCollective figures, 310–311Colors, 236–237, 251, 420–421Commonality, 337–338Complementary dreams, 41Composite figures, 310–311, 
335–341Condensation, 202n, 511
botanical monograph dream,
299–302
dream-content and dream-
thought, 296–297
Freud’s Autodidasker dream,
315–319, 488
Freud’s dream of Irma’s
injection, 309–313
Freud’s evisceration dream, 459intensity of dream-images, 
345–346
May-beetle dream, 307–309representability and, 354–355Sappho dream, 302–307through neologisms, 313–321unconscious, role in process, 592
Condoms, 209Confusion, 346–350Consciousness, 610
alteration of mental acitvity in
dreams, 86–87
associations between 
dream-images, 87–89
choice of material for
reproduction, 52–53
derivation of dream material
from memory, 44–54
drawing dream-images, 204nessential difference between
dream life and, 78–93
fragmentary nature of dream
material, 53–54
indifferent material in 
dreams, 201
internal organic somatic 
stimuli, 67
pre-scientific view of dreams, 
38–39
psychical apparatus, 541–545psychical sources of stimulation,
70–71
recent material in dreams, 
201–202660 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 660relation of dreams to, 41–44
secondary revision, 505–506spatial, 80theory of dreaming, 102–108unconscious and consciousness,
605–615
unpleasure principle, 573–574See also Memory
Consonance, 335–341Constancy, law of, xviConstancy, Principle of, 565nContent of dreams
affect and, 473decoding method of
interpretation, 123
indifferent material, 193–199internal processes as dream-
instigators, 202–203, 231
manifest and latent, 160–161,
160n, 510n
memory, 44–54recent material, 188–192stimuli connections, 243transformation of dream-thought
into, 510–511
unification of material, 201–203See also Childhood experience;
Sexual stimuli and elements;Symbolism
Contradictions, 329–330, 332–
334, 341–344, 352
Contraries, 332–334, 341–344Convenience, dreams of, 147–150,
253
Convergence, enforced, 202nCounter-wish dreams, 181Crime, 94–95, 163–164Critical observation, 126–127Cruelty to animals, 307–308Cyclamen monograph, 193–201,
213, 299–302, 473
Daudet, Alphonse, 303, 496David, J. J., 317Davidson, Wolf, 90Day-dreams and daytime thoughts,
496–497, 536–537, 560–561
De rerum natura (Lucretius), 42–43
Death in dreams, 59
absence of affect in dreams of,
471–472
as the Great Unknown, 478–479birth dreams, 411nburial at sea, 472children’s death-wishes, 267–276,
284–288, 344
children’s deaths, 469–470death of a person of whom the
dreamer is fond, 266–288
distortion disguising wish-
fulfilment, 176–180
frequent and absurd appearance
of dead people, 438–439
Freud’s dream of his father’s
funeral, 333–334
illness, 66Stekel’s interpretation, 370–371typical dreams of, 396
Death of Freud’s patient, 136, 142Decoding method of dream
interpretation, 123, 128–129
Delage, Yves, 107–108Delboeuf, I., 45–46, 53–54, 80–81,
89, 102–103, 130
Délire, 87–88, 87n
Delirium, 116–117Delusions, 207–208n. See also
Hallucinations
Demonic nature of dreams, 36–37,
54, 608–609
Dental dreams. SeeTeeth in dreams
Destiny, 278–281Diffuse general sensibility, 256Diptheria, 311Displacement, 200–201, 203–205,
311, 322–326, 338, 353–356,477–479
Dissimulation, 166–167661 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 661Distortion in dreams, 159–185
anxiety as wish-fulfilment, 
183–185
children’s death-wishes against
parents, 285–286
counter-wish dreams, 181
disguised wish-fulfilment, 
167–168, 176–180
embarassment at being naked,
261–262
exchanging one person for
another, 136–137
experimentation with sexual
symbols, 395
hypocritical dreams disguising
wish-fulfilment, 161–173
hysterical identification, 173–175indifferent material as dream
source, 198–201
infantile material, 240’innocent’ dreams, 205love services, ambiguity of, 
167–168n
obstacles to interpretation, 528origins of, 161reversals, 343revision, 518–520through displacement, 325–326,
325n
See also Censorship
Divine nature of dreams, 36–39, 54Drawing dream images, 204nDream-book, 123–125, 124n, 245,
364–365
Dream-images
drawing, 204nforgetting dreams, 74hypnagogic hallucinations, 63–64ideas and, 90n
Dream-imagination, 588–589Dream-life
associations between 
dream-images, 87–89
testing reality, 80–82Dream-thought, 586
botanical monograph dream,
301–302
causal relations between, 331–332childhood experience and, 
212–215
condensation, 296–321displacement, 322–326dream formation process, 
593–594
expressing contraries and
contradictories, 332–334
logical relations between, 328–331transformation into dream
content, 510–511
Dream-wishes, 560–563. See also
Wish-fulfilment, dreams as
Dream-work. SeeCondensation;
Displacement; Representation,means of; Symbolism
Dreamer, character and
circumstance of, 123–124
Du Prel, C., 297n, 607nDugas, L., 84, 88Dysentery, 138–139, 311
Ego, 110
altruistic dreams, 288n
children’s death-wishes against
parents, 284–285
dreams as a wish to prolong
sleep, 254
Freud’s dream of Goethe, 448Freud’s dream of Rome, 
449–452
representation through
identification, 338–339, 339n
Eliot, George, 307–308Ellis, Havelock, 52, 88, 192, 205n,
366, 385, 505
Embellishing dreams, 76Emission dreams, 257n, 332, 350,
380–385, 399–403, 405, 412, 571662 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 662Emotions. See Affect
The Emperor’s New Clothes
(Andersen), 261–262
Epileptic disorders, 114
Erdmann, J. E., 98Etruscans, 462, 472Evisceration, 459–462, 482Examination (test-taking) dreams,
291–293, 396
Excretion theory, 105–106, 577, 588Exhibitionism, 262–263Experimentally produced dreams,
243n
External objective sensory stimuli,
xviii, 55–62, 81n, 87–90,241–242, 244–245, 249–257,290, 586–587
Extravagance in dreams, 285nEyes, 408n, 430–431, 435, 
486–487
Falling asleep, 62–64, 78–80, 83–84Falling in dreams, 59, 69, 223–224,
288–290, 403
False connections, 504Family and friends
adults’ death-wishes against,
276–278, 287–288
childhood experiences, 213–215,
221–222
children’s death-wishes against
parents, 273–276
children’s death-wishes against
siblings, 266–288
death of relatives, 176–178distortion in dreams disguising
wish-fulfilment, 163–165
Freud’s dream of the death and
memorial of friends, 485–490
personal and professional
involvement, 130–131
Stekel’s interpretation of
symbols, 371
Fantasy, 496–497Faust (Goethe), 104n, 166n, 
301n, 304
Features of dreams, 80Fechner, G. T., 78, 84, 538Ferenczi, S., 263n, 365n, 380, 388,
478, 571
Fichte, I. H., 98Fire, 513–515Fliegende Blätter, 504–505
Fliess, Wilhelm, xiii–xiv, xviii–xix,
119, 285n, 312, 315–316,342, 430, 456, 486
Flowers, 233–235, 361–363, 
385–388, 453–454. See alsoBotanical monograph
Flying in dreams, 69, 246–247,
288–290, 396, 403
Food and drink in dreams, 47
auto-symbolic subsitutes for
thought, 359–360
childhood memories in dreams,
225–227
distortion disguising 
wish-fulfilment, 171–173, 198
external stimuli affecting 
dreams, 251
extravagance in dreams, 285–286feeling of reality and
representaiton of repetition,383–385
Freud’s dream of his father’s
death, 444–446
fruit, 304–305hunger dreams, 154–155puns and turns of speech, 
429–430
recent material in dreams, 192nthirst dreams, 148–150, 149n,
252
wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 
153–155, 155n, 157, 157n
Foreign language, 45Forgetting dreams, 73–77, 297,
521–535663 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 663Formal characteristics of
representation, 344–346, 511
France, Anatole, 108n
Friends. SeeFamily and friends
Fruit, 304–305Function of dreaming, 101–113,
577–580, 588
Functional phenomena, 390, 
421–422n, 507–508
Fur in dreams, 60, 112, 412
Genitalia. See Sexual stimuli and
elements
Germs of life, 104, 104n
Ghosts, 414, 430, 546–547Girou de Buzareingues, C. and I., 57Glosses on dreams, 347–348Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von,
104n, 166n, 171–173, 228,301n, 304, 335, 342, 367,437n, 447–449, 456, 608
Gold, 413Gomperz, Theodor, 123nGreece. See Ancient civilizations
Groesinger, W., 116Guillotine, 58–59, 93, 500–502,
574
Gulliver’s Travels (Swift), 62, 62n,
475–476
Haffner, P ., 41, 81n, 94, 96Haggard, Rider, 459–460Hallam, Florence, 160Hallucinations, 114–117
hypnagogic, 63–64independence from space and
time, 81n
internal organic somatic 
stimuli, 68
replacing thoughts with 
images, 79
transference of ideas, 87–90
Hamlet (Shakespeare), 282–283,
283n, 452, 452nHannibal, 218–219Hartmann, Eduard von, 531–532nHat, symbolism of, 373–375, 
422–423
Healing, 109
relation of dreams to waking 
life, 41
Heat and cold, 56–58Hegel, G. W. F ., 84Heine, Heinrich, 443nHelmholtz, Hermann von, xvi, 608Hercules, 475–477Heroes, 218–219Herophilus, 157nHervey de St. Denys, Marie-Jean-
Léon Lecoq Marquis de,46–47, 58, 89, 90n, 571
Hildebrandt, F . W., 43–44, 48, 
51–53, 85, 95–96, 99
Hilferding, M., 479Hippocrates, 413Historical scenes in dreams, 
231–233
Historical significance of dreams,
608–609
Hoffbauer, J. C., 56Homosexuality, 396, 407Horses, 249–251, 389–392, 417Hostility, 486Hunger dreams, 252–253Hypermnesic dreams, 46–49, 586Hypnagogic hallucinations, 
63–64, 79
Hypnosis, 172Hypocritical dreams disguising
wish-fulfilment, 161–170,479–481
Hysterical identification, 173–175Hysterical symptoms, 609, 
612–613
building from trivia, 239nchronological reversal, 343nconvergence of unconscious and
preconscious, 568–569664 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 664fantasies of sexual misconduct by
doctors, 207–208
Freud’s dream of Irma, 131–145
male hysteria, 446neologisms in dreams, 320wish-fulfilment in dreams, 
175–176
Ibsen, Henrik, 313Ideational process, 71–72, 75, 
267, 467
Identification, 173–175, 335–341Identity, roots of symbols and, 365Illness
childhood experience in dreams,
213, 217, 223–224
cocaine use, 194–195diagnostic and therapeutic value
of dreams, 65–68
distortion disguising wish-
fulfilment, 175–176
Freud’s difficulty in diagnosing,
318
Freud’s dream of Irma’s
injection, 131–145, 309–313
inhibited movement in dreams,
303
pain affecting dreams, 250–251wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 
150–151, 154–155, 155n, 287
Illusions, 61, 101, 244Imaginative visual phenomena, 63,
110–111
Impatience in dreams, 211Impotence, 209–210, 377–378,
479
Incest, 280–281Incoherence, 84nIndifferent material in dreams, 
193–199, 203–205
Inertia principle, xviiiInfanticide, 179–180Infantile material. SeeChildhood
experienceInhibited movement, 350–352Inhibition, 256–266‘Innocent’ dreams, 205–210, 220–
221, 223–224, 407–408, 429
Inquisition, The, 97nInsanity, 114–116Insects, 307–309Intensity, psychical and sensory,
323n, 344–346, 511, 555–556, 561, 575, 592–593
Internal organic somatic stimuli,
65–70
childhood memories, 231clothing and colors in dreams,
421
combining with external stimuli
to produce dreams, 254–256
dream-imagination, 111–112external nervous stimuli and,
241–242
organic needs struggling with the
need for sleep, 257n
transference of ideas into
illusions, 87–90
urinary symbols, 380urinary symbols and stimuli,
412–413
See also Sexual stimuli and
elements
Internal subjective sensory
excitations, 62–65
Intestinal stimuli, 413Involuntary ideas, 99–101, 526,
529–531
Involuntary thoughts, 127–128
Jensen, Wilhelm, 122n
Jessen, P ., 42, 56, 76, 99–100Jews, 215–219, 450Jodl, F ., 86Jones, Ernest, 288n, 398n, 411Joseph (Biblical figure), 122Josephus, 349Judgement, 456–459665 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 665Julius Caesar (Shakespeare), 
432–433
Jung, C. G., 349, 398n
Kant, Immanuel, 98, 115, 507
Keller, Gottfried, 265, 417nKrauss, F . S., 68
Ladd, G. T rumbull, 64–65
Landscapes, 379, 381, 
409–410
Language
absurdity in, 437, 445–446childhood experience in 
dreams, 213, 234–235
condensation through
neologisms, 313–320
distortion disguising meaning,
206–208
dream-books, 124n–125nfalse connections, 505Freud’s dream of the death 
and memorial of friends, 485–486
memory as source of dream
material, 45
neologisms in Freud’s dream of
Rome, 449–451
puns and turns of speech, 
415–423, 430–434, 437,441–442, 485–486, 521–522n, 523–524
riddle in Freud dream of 
Count Thun, 441–442
sexual connections of symbols,
365n
speeches, 427–430symbolic connections, 365symbolic transformation of
genitalia with upper bodyparts, 398
symbols for sexual images, 
360–361
travel dreams, 217wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 157word sounds linking 
dream-images, 88
Lasker, Eduard, 316–317, 316nLassalle, Ferdinand, 316–317, 316nLatent content, 160–161, 160n,
165–166, 187–188, 212–213,239–240, 322–326, 510n. See also Dream-thought
Lemoine, A., 84–85Limp position, 70Lions, 468–469Lipps, T., 244, 606–607Lizards, 45–46Location of dreams, 78, 339, 538Love services, 167–168nLucretius, 42–43Luggage, 224‘Lynkeus,’ 120, 325n
Maass, J. G. E., 42
Macbeth (Shakespeare), 283
Macrobius, 37–38Male hysteria, 446Manifest content, 160–161, 160n,
187–188, 510n
factors in transforming latent
thought into, 326–327
latent content and, 295–296recent events as dream material,
197–198, 239–240
Marriage, 107, 307–309, 356–358,
424–425, 499–500
Masochism, 182Masturbation, 209–210, 378, 383,
391–394, 396, 400–403, 418,546, 584
Material of dreams. See Content 
of dreams
Matura, 292nMaury, L. F . A., 42–43, 49–50, 
57–59, 61, 84–86, 88–90,100–101, 211, 500–502
May-beetle dream, 307–309666 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 666Meier, G. F ., 56
Memory, 44–54
alteration of mental acitvity in
dreams, 86
choice of reproduced material,
51–52
condensation of dream-content,
297
conscious and, 611–612forgetting dreams, 73–77fragmentary nature of dream
material, 53–54
hysterical symptoms, 613internal processes as 
dream-instigators, 202–203
psychical apparatus, 540–541thirst dreams, 149, 149nthree characteristics of, 187–188,
239–240
See also Childhood experience;
Consciousness
Menstruation, 335Mental activity, 86Mental disease, 113–117, 589
associations between 
dream-images, 87–89
internal organic somatic 
stimuli, 67
nakedness, 263translation of symbols, 364
Meyer, Conrad Ferdinand, 476Micturation. See Urination
Mind, concept of the, 607nMoi splanchnique, 67
Money, 423–425Moral sense in dreams, 93–101Motor paralysis, xvMovement, inhibited, 350–352Murder, 179–180, 278–281, 465.
See also Death in dreams
Music in dreams, 47, 230, 427–428n
Nakedness in dreams, 69, 260–266,
340–341Names, misuse of, 226–231
Napoleon, 253Nelson, J., 51Neologisms, 313–321. See also Puns
and turns of speech
Nervous stimulation, 71. See also
Stimuli and source of dreammaterial
Neurone theory, xvi–xviii, 541–542Neurophysiology, xviNeuroses, dreams and, 129–130Nightmares, 38Novalis, 109Numbers, 423–425, 446–447, 517
Obsessional thoughts, 321n, 465
Oedipus dreams, xviii, 378, 
383–384, 408–409n, 408–410
Oedipus Rex (Sophocles), 278–281
Offenbach, Jacques, 493–494Opera dreams, 356–358, 396–398,
443
Organic stimuli. SeeInternal
organic somatic stimuli
Orgasm, 257n, 332, 350, 382, 412Overdetermination of dream
elements, 324, 508, 569
Pain
affecting dreams, 56–57, 612death of a person of whom the
dreamer is fond, 267
genital pain, 250–252wish-fulfilment, dreams as, 
150–151
Paneth, Josef, 487nParalysis, 55Paranoia, 114, 264, 320Paraoh’s dream, 349Parents
adults’ death-wishes against,
277–281
castration dreams in children, 379667 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 667Parents (cont.)
children’s death-wishes against,
273–276, 284–288, 344
dreams of a father’s death, 
434–437, 444–447, 455
jealousy over children, 376
Oedipus dreams, 378, 408–410Shakespeare’s portrayal of
parental relationships, 282–283
symbolism of buildings, stairs,
and shafts, 377–378
symbolism of fruit, 384wet-nurse memories, 226, 
305–306, 306n
Paris, France, 217Partial awakening, dreaming as,
102–108
Parties, 151–152, 306Parvenus, 481–482
Pathological symptoms, dream
interpretation and, 125–126
Perceptual system, 610–611Periodicity (biological) theory, 
190–192, 447n
Pfaff, E. R., 95Phantasies of a Realist (‘Lynkeus’),
325n
Pharaoh’s dream, 122Piano, 208Plagiarism, 227Plagiostomes, 226n, 227Plato, 95Play, dreams as, 577–578nPleasure principle, xviii, 596, 611Plotinus, 159nPoliceman dream, 426–427Politics, 229–235Popper, Josef. See ‘Lynkeus’
Pötzl, O., 204nPreconscious thought, 510n, 
541–545, 553–554, 562–563,567–571, 575, 577, 590–591,605–606, 612
Pregnancy, 151, 421Prehistoric view of dreams, 36. See
alsoAncient civilizations
Premonitory dreams. SeeProphetic
nature of dreams
Primary processes, xv–xvi, 
585–604, 597n
Prince, Morton, 524–525Proper names, 422Prophetic nature of dreams, 38,
39n, 66, 93, 122, 214–215,617–619
Propyls, 311–312Prostitutes, 222–224, 320Psychical apparatus, 539–545, 
552–556, 564–571, 594–595.See also Unconscious
Psychical sources of stimulation,
xviii, 35, 70–73, 102–108,203–204, 241, 245, 494,606–607
Psychological characteristics of
dreams, 77–93
Psychoses, relations between dreams
and, 113–114, 567––568
Punishment dreams, 481–482,
484–485, 557–560
Puns and turns of speech, 415–423,
430–434, 437, 441–442,485–486, 521–522n, 523–524
Purkinje, J. E., 109
Rabelais, François, 475–476
Radestock, P ., 74, 85–86, 94, 
116–117
Rank, Otto, xiii, xxviii, xxxi, 
183n–184n, 240n, 257n,283n, 287, 312, 350, 380,399, 408n, 412, 483
Rat Man, 321n, 355n, 452nRational thought, 84n, 610Reality
testing dreams, 81nSee also Consciousness;
Unconscious668 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  2:09 PM  Page 668Rebus metaphor, 296, 418
Recent material in dreams, 50–51,
107, 188–192, 203–204,204n, 205
dental dreams, 400importance in dream formation,
562–564
individual factors affecting
dreams, 257
‘innocent’ dreams, 206–207internal processes as dream-
instigators, 202–203
latent content of dreams, 
239–240
plays on words, 420relation to dream-thoughts, 
555–556, 590
staircase dream, 381unconscious linking with, 
572–585
unconscious mind’s role in
dream formation, 560–562
unification of material, 248unification with childhood
experience, 222–223
wish-fulfilment, 551–552, 
560–563
Recollection, 73–77Reconciliation dreams, 482–483Recording dreams, 76–77nRecurring dreams, 74n, 212Redreaming, 513–515Regression, 544–550, 566, 572–585Reign of Terror, 58–59Religious faith, 39, 60, 97Representability, consideration of,
353–363, 374n, 511
Representation, means of, 
326–353
calculations and speeches, 
414–434
causal relations between 
dream-thoughts, 331–332
clarity and confusion, 346–350contradictions and contraries,
332–334, 341–344
factors in transforming latent
thought into manifest content,326–327
logical relations between dream-
thoughts, 328–331
representability considerations,
353–363, 374n
sensory intensity, 344–346similarity, consoance, and
approximation, 335–341
symbols in typical dreams, 
363–373
value of emergent material, 
327–328
See also Symbolism
Repression, 255, 264, 525, 
562–563, 585–604, 611, 613
Reproducing dreams, 76–77, 
83, 297
Rescue dreams, 413Resistance, 518–520, 523–524Resolution of issues, dreaming as,
105–108
Retinal excitation, 63–64Revenants, 490
Reversal, 341–344, 410–412, 418,
477–479
Revision, 518–520Riddles, 441–442Riding whip, 388–392Robbers and burglars in dreams, 414Robert, W., 50–51, 105–106, 
200–201
Romantic love, 176–177, 356–358,
375–376, 618–619
Rome, Italy, 215–218, 215nRosegger, Peter, 479, 479n
Sachs, Hanns, 420
Sappho (Daudet), 303, 305–306
Sappho dream, 302–307, 322Satisfaction, 484–485669 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 669Scene of action, 78, 257, 538
Scherner, K. A., 109–113, 157n,
245, 247, 372n, 413
Schiller, Friedrich, 127–128, 437nSchleiermacher, F ., 99Scholz, F ., 94–95Schopenhauer, Arthur, 67–68, 
94, 507
Schrötter, K., 395Secondary processes, xv–xvi, 
585–604, 597n
Secondary revision, 497Secrets, 306Self-analysis, Freud’s, 461Self-corrections, 523Self-justification, 196–197Self-observation, 126–129Sense-impression, 60–61, 72, 
504, 551
Sensory stimuli. See Sexual stimuli
and elements; Stimuli andsource of dream material
Sequential control of ideas, 83–84Sexual stimuli and elements, 
612–613
anxiety dreams, 256, 581Bismarck’s riding whip, 
388–392
buildings, stairs, and shafts, 
377–378
castration dreams, 379causal relations between 
dream-thoughts, 332
chemical nature of, 140–141childhood experience, 211–212,
219–220, 222–223, 236–238
children’s dreams, 155nchronological reversal, 343ncounter-wish dreams, 182death, symbolism of, 178dental dreams, 399–403displacement, 322distortion of wish-fulfilment,
183(–184fn)dream-imagination, 111–112examination (test-taking) 
dreams, 293
examples of dream symbols,
367–372, 367n
feeling of reality, 384–385flowers, 385–388flying and falling, 223–224,
289–290, 289n, 405
frequency of sexual dreams, 
406–407
Freud’s bisexuality theory, 347Freud’s childhood memories, 227fruit symbolism, 384genital pain, 251–252genitals and intercourse, symbols
for, 371–372, 375–376
hat symbolism, 373–375hysterical identification, 
174–175, 569
in Hamlet, 283
inhibited movement in 
dreams, 352
‘innocent’ dreams, 205–210,
220–221, 407–408
Jung on erotic dreams, 349leading to the dream stimulus,
349–350
love services, 167–168nmasturbation, 393–394moral sense in dreams, 94nakedness in dreams, 264neologisms in dreams, 320neuroses masquerading as 
illness, 318
Oedipus dreams, xviii, 280–281,
378, 383–384, 408–409n,408–410
organic needs struggling with the
need for sleep, 257n
organic stimuli, 66people and landscapes, 379preoccupation with the human
body, 360–361670 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 670puns and turns of speech, 
429–430
Sappho symbolism, 306
sexual frustration, 309sexual innocence and sin, 
335, 340
staircases in dreams, 380–385Stekel’s interpretation of symbols
for genitalia, 371–372
symbolic elements of typical
dreams, 396–398
symbolic representations of the
body, 364–365, 608
urinary symbols, 380, 413
Shakespeare, William, 226n, 
282–283, 283n, 432–433,452
She(Haggard), 459–460
Siblings
competition in dreams, 305dreams of the death of, 268–273Freud’s dreams, 317, 440–442genital dream-symbols, 376
Silberer, Herbert, 236(ref), 
358–359, 527
Similarity relation, 335–341Simon, P . M., 61–62, 69Sleep, 40
arrangement of dream thoughts
during, 298
as source of dreams, 55–56characterizing the state of, 
587–588
disturbance causing dreams, 
54–55
dreaming of, 150dreams of convenience
prolonging, 253–254
functional phenomena, 507–508lack of interest in sensory
stimulus, 244
organic needs struggling with the
need for sleep, 257n
suppression of affect, 474Somatic process
affect, tendency to, 492dreams as, 104–108, 237–238somatic sources of dreams, 
240–259
unification of material, 248–249
Song of Solomon, 360
Sophocles, 278–281Sound, 58–62Spatial consciousness, 80Speech. See Language
Speeches, 427–430Sperber, Hans, 365nSpitta, K., 77, 84, 86, 88, 99, 242Spitteler, C., 270Stairs in dreams, 257–259, 
302–305, 322, 342, 377–378,380–385
Stärcke, Johan, 90Stekel, Wilhelm, 291–293, 364,
370, 376n, 391, 420
Stimuli and source of dream
material
dreaming as somatic process,
106–108
external objective sensory stimuli,
xviii, 55–62, 81n, 87–90,241–242, 244–245, 249–257,290, 586–587
forgetting dreams, 73–77infantile material, 211–240intensity of, 344–346internal organic somatic stimuli,
65–70, 111–112
internal subjective sensory
excitations, 62–65
memory of waking life, 44–54mental disease and dreams, 116perception of cessation in
dreams, 82–84
psychical apparatus, 539–545,
595
psychical sources of stimulation,
70–73, 494671 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 671Stimuli and source of dream
material (cont.)
psychological and physiological
sources, 54–73
sleep as closing of senses, 90n
somatic sources, 240–259unconscious and conscious, 
610–612
See also Recent material in
dreams
Stricker, S., 101Strümpell, A. von, 55Strümpell, I., 41, 48–49, 51–52,
65, 69, 73–76, 83, 86–87,242–244
Subconscious, 610Sully, James, 89, 160nSuper-conscious, 610Superficial associations, 533–535Superimposed layers of meaning,
234–235, 240, 240n, 263, 340
Supernatural nature of dreams, 
36–39
Swimming, 405Swoboda, Hermann, 119Symbolism, xii–xiii, xxvii–xxviii,
122, 124–125
Bismarck’s riding whip, 389–392bodily organs and functions,
245–247
buildings, stairs, and shafts, 
377–378
chemist’s masturbation dream,
393–394
clothing and colors, 420–421complementary dreams, 41death, 178dream interpretation without use
of, 372–373
dream theories of somatic
stimuli, 111–113
dreams of normal persons, 
385–388examples of dream symbols,
367–372
feeling of reality and
representaiton of repetition,383–385
Freud’s dream of Irma, 131–145hat as symbol of a man, 373–375of somatic stimuli, 245–247preoccupation with the human
body, 360–361
puns and turns of speech, 
415–423
representation of sexual material,
364–366
Sappho dream, 303sexual elements in ‘innocent’
dreams, 209–210
sexual symbols, experimentation
with, 394–395
staircases in dreams, 380–385Stekel’s translation of, 364, 
370–371
symbols of genitals and
intercourse, 375–376
unconscious, expression of 
the, 608
urinary symbols, 380woman as a room, 367nSee also Sexual stimuli and
elements
Synthesis of dreams, 326–328Syphilis, 182, 320Systems, 539
Tactile stimuli, 244–245, 290
Talking during sleep, 154–155Tartini, Giuseppe, 608, 608nTaxes, 180–181Teeth in dreams, 69, 132, 135, 
245, 247, 396–398n, 397–403, 398n
Telephones, 314Theater, 302–307, 424–425, 
502–503672 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/15/09  9:33 AM  Page 672Theoretical value of the study of
dreams, 613–614
Theories of dreaming, 101–113
Therapeutic value of dreams, 
65–68, 65n, 109
Thirst dreams. See Food and drink
in dreams
Threshold symbolism, 508Time compression and alteration,
59, 92–93, 231–233, 330–331, 343, 412, 446
Tissié, P ., 66–67, 72Tobowolska, Justine, 502, 506T rains, 396, 399–400, 417–418,
434–435, 440–442, 462–466
T rans-substantiation of sensations
into dream images, 67
T ravel, 152–154, 190n, 192, 
215–218, 215n, 229–232,252, 315–316, 347–348,415–416, 419, 476
Typical dream forms, 69, 259–293
bedwetting, 405–406calculation, 425–427death of a person of whom the
dreamer is fond, 266–288
dental dreams, 399–403embarassment at being naked,
260–266
examination (test-taking) dreams,
291–293
flying and falling, 288–290, 403organic stimuli, 412–413rescue and birth dreams, 
413–414
symbolic representation in, 
363–373, 395
Unconscious, 605–615
arrangement of dream thoughts
during sleep, 298
dream formation process, 
566–571Freud’s dream of changing train
carriages, 465
hysterical identification, 
174–175
interpretative process, 531–532plays on words, 419psychical apparatus, 541–545punishment dreams, 557–560recent events linking with, 
572–585
reinforcement preconscious
wishes, 553–554
role in dream formation, 
560–562, 564
two types of, 609
Unpleasant dreams, 161–170, 182,
255–256, 557–560
Unpleasure in dreams, 160Unpleasure principle, xviii, 
596–597, 611
Urination, 222–223, 237–238, 321,
380, 412–413, 475–477
Value, psychical, 345Vaschide, N., 90Vegetables, 206–207Verbal bridges, 227, 355n, 
386, 402
Virginity, 386–388Visual images and hallucinations,
63–65, 79, 79n, 358–359
Vold, J. Mourly, 70, 243n, 405Volition, 352Volkelt, J., 49, 58, 68, 84, 94, 
245–246
Waking life. See Consciousness
War, 470–471Weed, Sarah, 160Wet-nurse, 226, 305–306, 306nWeygandt, W., 41–42, 72, 149nWill, conflict of, 352Winckler, Hugo, 124nWinterstein, A. von, 42673 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 673Wish-fulfilment, dreams as, xiv–xv
absurd dreams of death, 438–439
Augean Stables dream, 477Bismarck’s dream, 390–391censorship disguising, 167–168childhood experience, 240children’s dreams, 151–156nchronological relations of 
dream-processes, 574–575
commonality and identification
in representation, 338
counter-wish dreams, 181day-dreams as, 497death of a person of whom the
dreamer is fond, 266–267,276–278, 287–288
distortion disguising, 161–173,
175–176, 179–180
dreams of convenience, 147–150embarassment at being naked,
261–262
external stimuli influencing
dreams, 250–251
flying dreams, 404frequency and diversity of, 
151–152
Freud’s dream of Irma, 142–143Freud’s dream of wife and
children, 318–319
Freud’s evisceration dream, 482hunger dreams, 155nhypocritical dreams disguising
wish-fulfilment, 161–170,479–481
intensity of dream-images, 
345–346
organic stimuli, 412–413pain and illness, 150–151psychology of dream processes,
551–554
punishment dream, 481–482representation through
identification, 339
reversals, 343, 556–557satisfaction, experience of, 
565–566
unification of material, 248–249unpleasant dreams and anxiety
dreams, 161
wishing to prolong sleep, 
254–255
Women
childhood experience in dreams,
220–226
counter-wish dreams, 181–182death of a person of whom the
dreamer is fond, 271
disguised wish-fulfilment, 
176–178
fantasies of sexual misconduct by
doctors, 207–208
Freud’s dream of Irma, 131–145hysterical identification, 171–175infanticide in dreams, 179–180‘innocent’ dreams, 206–207,
220–221
May-beetle dream, 307–309nakedness in dreams, 263nwish-fulfilment in dreams, 
175–176
Wundt, W., 60, 62, 72, 86, 243–244
Xerxes, 42Zeller, A., 98
Zola, Emile, 317–318674 General Index9780465019779-text_Layout 1  12/14/09  1:24 PM  Page 674