3993

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS
(1923)

3994

3995

Intentionally left blank

3996

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS
The neuroses of childhood have taught us that a number of things can easily be seen in them with the
naked eye which at a later age are only to be discovered after a thorough investigation. We may expect that
the same will turn out to be true of neurotic illnesses in earlier centuries, provided that we are prepared to
recognize them under names other than those of our present-day neuroses. We need not be surprised to
find that, whereas the neuroses of our unpsychological modern days take on a hypochondriacal aspect and
appear disguised as organic illnesses, the neuroses of those early times emerge in demonological
trappings. Several authors, foremost among them Charcot, have, as we know, identified the manifestations
of hysteria in the portrayals of possession and ecstasy that have been preserved for us in the productions
of art. If more attention had been paid to the histories of such cases at the time, it would not have been
difficult to retrace in them the subject-matter of a neurosis.
The demonological theory of those dark times has won in the end against all the somatic views of the
period of ‘exact’ science. The states of possession correspond to our neuroses, for the explanation of which
we once more have recourse to psychical powers. In our eyes, the demons are bad and reprehensible
wishes, derivatives of instinctual impulses that have been repudiated and repressed. We merely eliminate
the projection of these mental entities into the external world which the middle ages carried out; instead, we
regard them as having arisen in the patient’s internal life, where they have their abode.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
3997

I
THE STORY OF CHRISTOPH HAIZMANN
THE PAINTER
I am indebted to the friendly interest of Hofrat Dr. Payer-Thurn, director of the former Imperial
Fideikommissbibliothek of Vienna, for the opportunity of studying a seventeenth century demonological
neurosis of this kind. Payer-Thurn had discovered a manuscript in this library which originated from the
shrine of Mariazell and in which there was a detailed account of a miraculous redemption from a pact with
the Devil through the grace of the Blessed Virgin Mary. His interest was aroused by the resemblance of this
story to the legend of Faust, and has led him to undertake the exhaustive publication and editing of the
material. Finding, however, that the person whose redemption was described had been subject to
convulsive seizures and visions he approached me for a medical opinion on the case. We came to an
agreement to publish our investigations independently and separately. I should like to take this opportunity
of thanking him for his original suggestion and for the many ways in which he has assisted me in the study
of the manuscript.
This demonological case history leads to really valuable findings which can be brought to light without
much interpretation - much as a vein of pure metal may sometimes be struck which must elsewhere be
laboriously smelted from the ore.
The manuscript, an exact copy of which lies before me, falls into two quite distinct sections. One is a
report, written in Latin, by a monastic scribe or compiler; the other is a fragment from the patient’s diary,
written in German. The first succession contains a preface and a description of the actual miraculous cure.
The second can scarcely have been of any significance for the reverend Fathers but so much the more is it
of value for us. It serves in large part to confirm our judgement of the case, which might otherwise have
been hesitant, and we have good cause to be grateful to the clergy for having preserved the document
although it added nothing to support the tenor of their views and, indeed, may rather have weakened it.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
3998

But before going further into the composition of this little manuscript brochure, which bears the title
Trophaeum Mariano-Cellense, I must relate a part of its contents, which I take from the preface.
On September 5, 1677, the painter Christoph Haizmann, a Bavarian, was brought to Mariazell, with a
letter of introduction from the village priest of Pottenbrunn (in lower Austria) not far away.¹ The letter states
that the man had been staying in Pottenbrunn for some months, pursuing his occupation of painting. On
August 29, while in the church there, he had been seized with frightful convulsions. As these convulsions
recurred during the following days, he had been examined by the Praefectus Dominii Pottenbrunnensis with
a view to discovering what it was that was oppressing him and whether perhaps he had entered into illicit
traffic with the Evil Spirit.² Upon this, the man had admitted that nine years before, when he was in a state
of despondency about his art and doubtful whether he could support himself, he had yielded to the Devil,
who had tempted him nine times, and that he had given him his bond in writing to belong to him in body and
soul after a period of nine years. This period would expire on the twenty-fourth day of the current month.³
The letter went on to say that the unfortunate man had repented and was convinced that only the grace of
the Mother of God at Mariazell could save him, by compelling the Evil One to deliver up the bond, which
had been written in blood. For this reason the village priest ventured to recommend miserum hunc
hominem omni auxilio destitutum to the benevolence of the Fathers of Mariazell.
So far the narrative of Leopoldus Braun, the village priest of Pottenbrunn, dated September 1, 1677.
¹ No mention is anywhere made of the painter’s age. The context suggests that he was a man of between thirty and
forty, probably nearer the lower figure. He died, as we shall see, in 1700.
² We will merely note in passing the possibility that this interrogation inspired in the sufferer - ‘suggested’ to him - the
phantasy of his pact with the Devil.
³ Quorum et finis 24 mensis hujus futurus appropinquat.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
3999

We can now proceed with the analysis of the manuscript. It consists of three parts:
(1) A coloured title-page representing the scene of the signing of the pact and the scene of the
redemption in the chapel of Mariazell. On the next sheet are eight pictures, also coloured, representing the
subsequent appearances of the Devil, with a short legend in German attached to each. These pictures are
not the originals; they are copies - faithful copies, we are solemnly assured - of the original paintings by
Christoph Haizmann.
(2) The actual Trophaeum Mariano-Cellense (in Latin), the work of a clerical compiler who signs himself
at the foot ‘P.A.E.’ and appends to these initials four lines of verse containing his biography. The
Trophaeum ends with a deposition by the Abbot Kilian of St. Lambert, dated September 12, 1729, which is
in a different handwriting from that of the compiler. It testifies to the exact correspondence of the manuscript
and the pictures with the originals preserved in the archives. There is no mention of the year in which the
Trophaeum was compiled. We are free to assume that it was done in the same year in which the Abbot
Kilian made his deposition - that is, in 1729; or, since the last date mentioned in the text is 1714 -, we may
put the compiler’s work somewhere between the years 1714 and 1729. The miracle which was to be
preserved from oblivion by this manuscript occurred in 1677 - that is to say, between thirty-seven and fiftytwo years earlier.
(3) The painter’s diary, written in German and covering the period from his redemption in the chapel till
January 13 of the following year, 1678. It is inserted in the text of the Trophaeum near the end.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4000

The core of the actual Trophaeum consists of two pieces of writing: the letter of introduction, mentioned
above, from the village priest, Leopold Braun of Pottenbrunn, dated September 1, 1677, and the report by
the Abbot Franciscus of Mariazell and St. Lambert, describing the miraculous cure. This is dated
September 12, 1677, that is to say, only a few days later. The activity of the editor or compiler, P.A.E., has
provided a preface which as it were fuses the contents of these two documents; he has also added some
connecting passages of little importance, and, at the end, an account of the subsequent vicissitudes of the
painter, based on enquiries made in the year 1714.¹
The painter’s previous history is thus told three times over in the Trophaeum: (1) in the village priest of
Pottenbrunn’s letter of introduction, (2) in the formal report by the Abbot Franciscus and (3) in the editor’s
preface. A comparison of these three sources discloses certain discrepancies which it will be not
unimportant for us to follow up.
I can now continue with the painter’s story. After he had undergone a prolonged period of penance and
prayer at Mariazell, the Devil appeared to him in the sacred Chapel at midnight, on September 8, the
Nativity of the Virgin, in the form of a winged dragon, and gave him back the pact, which was written in
blood. We shall learn later, to our surprise, that two bonds with the Devil appear in Christoph Haizmann’s
story - an earlier one, written in black ink, and a later one, written in blood. The one referred to in the
description of the scene of exorcism, as can also he seen from the picture on the title-page, is the one
written in blood - that is, the later one.
¹ This would seem to suggest that the Trophaeum, too, dates from 1714.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4001

At this point a doubt as to the credibility of the clerical reporters may well arise in our minds and warn us
not to waste our labours on a product of monastic superstition. We are told that several clerics, mentioned
by name, assisted at the exorcism and were present in the Chapel when the Devil appeared. If it had been
asserted that they, too, saw the Devil appear in the form of a dragon and offer the painter the paper written
in red (Schedam sibi porrigentem conspexisset), we should be faced by several unpleasant possibilities,
among which that of a collective hallucination would be the mildest. But the Abbot Franciscus’s testimony
dispels this doubt. Far from asserting that the assisting clerics saw the Devil too, he only states in
straightforward and sober words that the painter suddenly tore himself away from the Fathers who were
holding him, rushed into the corner of the Chapel where he saw the apparition, and then returned with the
paper in his hand.¹
The miracle was great, and the victory of the Holy Mother over Satan without question; but unfortunately
the cure was not a lasting one. It is once more to the credit of the clergy that they have not concealed this.
After a short time the painter left Mariazell in the best of health and went to Vienna, where he lived with a
married sister. On October 11 fresh attacks began, some of them very severe, and these are reported in
the diary until January 13. They consisted in visions and ‘absences’, in which he saw and experienced
every kind of thing, in convulsive seizures accompanied by the most painful sensations, on one occasion in
paralysis of the legs, and so on. This time, however, it was not the Devil who tormented him; it was by
sacred figures that he was vexed - by Christ and by the Blessed Virgin herself. It is remarkable that he
suffered no less through these heavenly manifestations and the punishments they inflicted on him than he
had formerly through his traffic with the Devil. In his diary, indeed, he included these fresh experiences too
as manifestations of the Devil; and when, in May, 1678, he returned to Mariazell, he complained of maligini
Spiritûs manifestationes.
¹ . . . ipsumque Daemonem ad Aram Sac. Cellae per fenestrellam in cornu Epistolae, Schedam sibi porrigentem
conspexisset, eo advolans e Religiosorum manibus, qui eum tenebant, ipsam Schedam ad manum obtinuit. . . .’

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4002

He told the reverend Fathers that his reason for returning was that he had to require the Devil to give him
back another, earlier bond, which had been written in ink.¹ This time once more the Blessed Virgin and the
pious Fathers helped him to obtain the fulfilment of his request. As to how this came about, however, the
report is silent. It merely states shortly: quâ iuxta votum redditâ - he prayed once again and received the
pact back. After this he felt quite free and entered the Order of the Brothers Hospitallers.
We have occasion yet again to acknowledge that in spite of the obvious purpose of his efforts, the
compiler has not been tempted into departing from the veracity required of a case history. For he does not
conceal the outcome of the enquiry that was made in 1714 from the Superior of the Monastery of the
Brothers Hospitallers concerning the painter’s later history. The Reverend Pater Provincialis reported that
Brother Chrysostomus had again been repeatedly tempted by the Evil Spirit, who tried to seduce him into
making a fresh pact (though this only happened ‘when he had drunk somewhat too much wine’). But by the
grace of God, it had always been possible to repel these attempts. Brother Chrysostomus had died of a
hectic fever ‘peacefully and of good comfort’ in the year 1700 in the Monastery of the Order, at Neustatt on
the Moldau.
¹ This bond had been signed in September, 1668, and by May, 1678, nine and a half years later, it would long since
have fallen due.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4003

II
THE MOTIVE FOR THE PACT WITH THE DEVIL
If we look at this bond with the Devil as if it were the case history of a neurotic, our interest will turn in the
first instance to the question of its motivation, which is, of course, intimately connected with its exciting
cause. Why does anyone sign a bond with the Devil? Faust, it is true, asked contemptuously: ‘Was willst du
armer Teufel geben?’ But he was wrong. In return for an immortal soul, the Devil has many things to offer
which are highly prized by men: wealth, security from danger, power over mankind and the forces of nature,
even magical arts, and, above all else, enjoyment - the enjoyment of beautiful women. These services
performed or undertakings made by the Devil are usually mentioned specifically in the agreement made
with him.¹ What, then, was the motive which induced Christoph Haizmann to make his pact?
Curiously enough, it was none of these very natural wishes. To put the matter beyond doubt, one has
only to read the short remarks attached by the painter to his illustrations of the apparitions of the Devil. For
example, the caption to the third vision runs: ‘On the third occasion within a year and a half, he appeared to
me in this loathsome shape, with a book in his hand which was full of magic and black arts . . .’ But from the
legend attached to a later apparition we learn that the Devil reproached him violently for having ‘burnt his
beforementioned book’, and threatened to tear him to pieces if he did not give it back.
¹ Cf. Faust, Part I, Scene 4:
Ich will mich hier zu deinem Dienst verbinden,
Auf deinem Wink nicht rasten und nicht ruhn;
Wenn wir uns drüuben wieder finden,
So sollst du mir das Gleiche thun.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4004

At his fourth appearance the Devil showed him a large yellow money-bag and a great ducat and promised
him to give him as many of these as he wanted at any time. But the painter is able to boast that he ‘had
taken nothing whatever of the kind’.
Another time the Devil asked him to turn to enjoyment and entertainment, and the painter remarks that
‘this indeed came to pass at his desire; but I did not continue for more than three days and it was then
brought to an end’.
Since he rejected magical arts, money and pleasures when they were offered him by the Devil, and still
less made them conditions of the pact, it becomes really imperative to know what the painter in fact wanted
from the Devil when he signed a bond with him. Some motive he must have had for his dealings with the
Devil.
On this point, too, the Trophaeum provides us with reliable information. He had become low-spirited, was
unable or unwilling to work properly and was worried about making a livelihood; that is to say, he was
suffering from melancholic depression, with an inhibition in his work and (justified) fears about his future.
We can see that what we are dealing with really is a case history. We learn, too, the exciting cause of the
illness, which the painter himself, in the caption to one of his pictures of the Devil, actually calls a
melancholia (‘that I should seek diversion and banish melancholy’). The first of our three sources of
information, the village priest’s letter of introduction, speaks, it is true, only of the state of depression (‘dum
artis suae progressum emolumentumque secuturum pusillanimis perpenderet’), but the second source, the
Abbot Franciscus’s report, tells us the cause of this despondency or depression as well. He says: ‘acceptâ
aliquâ pusillanimitate ex morte parentis’; and in the compiler’s preface the same words are used, though in
a reversed order: (‘ex morte parentis acceptâ aliquâ pusillanimitate’). His father, then, had died and he had
in consequence fallen into a state of melancholia; whereupon the Devil had approached him and asked him
why he was so downcast and sad, and had promised ‘to help him in every way and to give him support’. ¹
¹ The first picture on the title-page and its caption represent the Devil in the form of an ‘honest citizen’.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4005

Here was a person, therefore, who signed a bond with the Devil in order to be freed from a state of
depression. Undoubtedly an excellent motive, as anyone will agree who can have an understanding sense
of the torments of such a state and who knows as well how little medicine can do to alleviate this ailment.
Yet no one who has followed the story so far as this would be able to guess what the wording of this bond
(or rather, of these two bonds)¹ with the Devil actually was.
These bonds bring us two great surprises. In the first place, they mention no undertaking given by the
Devil in return for whose fulfilment the painter pledges his eternal bliss, but only a demand made by the
Devil which the painter must satisfy. It strikes us as quite illogical and absurd that this man should give up
his soul, not for something he is to get from the Devil but for something he is to do for him. But the
undertaking given by the painter seems even stranger.
The first ‘syngrapha’, written in ink, runs as follows: ‘Ich Christoph Haizmann undterschreibe mich disen
Herrn sein leibeigener Sohn auff 9. Jahr. 1669 Jahr.’ The second, written in blood, runs:‘Anno 1669.
‘Christoph Haizmann. Ich verschreibe mich disen Satan ich sein leibeigner Sohn zu sein, und in 9. Jahr
ihm mein Leib und Seel zuzugeheren.’
¹ Since there were two of them - the first written in ink, and the second written about a year later in blood - both said
still to be in the treasury of Mariazell and to be transcribed in the Trophaeum.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4006

All our astonishment vanishes, however, if we read the text of the bonds in the sense that what is
represented in them as a demand made by the Devil is, on the contrary, a service performed by him - that
is to say, it is a demand made by the painter. The incomprehensible pact would in that case have a
straightforward meaning and could be paraphrased thus. The Devil undertakes to replace the painter’s lost
father for nine years. At the end of that time the painter becomes the property, body and soul, of the Devil,
as was the usual custom in such bargains. The train of thought which motivated the painter in making the
pact seems to have been this: his father’s death had made him lose his spirits and his capacity to work; if
he could only obtain a father-substitute he might hope to regain what he had lost.
A man who has fallen into a melancholia on account of his father’s death must really have been fond of
him. But, if so, it is very strange that such a man should have hit upon the idea of taking the Devil as a
substitute for the father whom he loved.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4007

III
THE DEVIL AS A FATHER-SUBSTITUTE
I fear that sober critics will not be prepared to admit that this fresh interpretation has made the meaning of
this pact with the Devil clear. They will have two objections to make to it.
In the first place they will say that it is not necessary to regard the bond as a contract in which the
undertakings of both parties have been set out. On the contrary, they will argue, it contains only the
painter’s undertaking; the Devil’s is omitted from the text, and is, as it were, sousentendu: the painter gives
two undertakings - firstly to be the Devil’s son for nine years, and secondly to belong to him entirely after
death. In this way one of the premisses on which our conclusion is built would be disposed of.
The second objection will be that we are not justified in attaching any special importance to the
expression ‘the Devil’s bounden son’; that this is no more than a common figure of speech, which anyone
could interpret in the same way as the reverend Fathers may have done. For in their Latin translation they
did not mention the relationship of son promised in the bonds, but merely say that the painter ‘mancipavit’
himself - made himself a bondslave - to the Evil One and had undertaken to lead a sinful life and to deny
God and the Holy Trinity. Why depart from this obvious and natural view of the matter?¹ The position would
simply be that a man, in the torment and perplexity of a melancholic depression, signs a bond with the
Devil, to whom he ascribes the greatest therapeutic power. That the depression was occasioned by his
father’s death would then be irrelevant; the occasion might quite as well have been something else.
¹ In point of fact, when we come to consider later at what time and for whom these bonds were drawn up, we shall
realize that their text had to be expressed in unobtrusive and generally comprehensible terms. It is enough for us,
however, that it contains an ambiguity which we can take as the starting-point of our discussion.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4008

All this sounds convincing and reasonable. Psycho-analysis has once more to meet the reproach that it
makes hair-splitting complications in the simplest things and sees mysteries and problems where none
exist, and that it does this by laying undue stress on insignificant and irrelevant details, such as occur every
where, and making them the basis of the most far-reaching and strangest conclusions. It would be useless
for us to point out that this rejection of our interpretation would do away with many striking analogies and
break a number of subtle connections which we are able to demonstrate in this case. Our opponents will
say that those analogies and connections do not in fact exist, but have been imported into the case by us
with quite uncalled-for ingenuity.
I will not preface my reply with the words, ‘to be honest’ or ‘to be candid’, for one must always be able to
be these things without any special preliminaries. I will instead say quite simply that I know very well that no
reader who does not already believe in the justifiability of the psycho-analytic mode of thought will acquire
that belief from the case of the seventeenth-century painter, Christoph Haizmann. Nor is it my intention to
make use of this case as evidence of the validity of psycho-analysis. On the contrary, I presuppose its
validity and am employing it to throw light on the painter’s demonological illness. My justification for doing
so lies in the success of our investigations into the nature of the neuroses in general. We may say in all
modesty that to-day even the more obtuse among our colleagues and contemporaries are beginning to
realize that no understanding of neurotic states can be reached without the help of psycho-analysis.
‘These shafts can conquer Troy, these shafts alone’

as Odysseus confesses in the Philoctetes of Sophocles.
If we are right in regarding our painter’s bond with the Devil as a neurotic phantasy, there is no need for
any further apology for considering it psycho-analytically. Even small indications have a meaning and
importance, and quite specially when they are related to the conditions under which a neurosis originates.
To be sure, it is as possible to overvalue as to undervalue them, and it is a matter of judgement how far one
should go in exploiting them. But anyone who does not believe in psycho-analysis - or, for the matter of
that, even in the Devil - must be left to make what he can of the painter’s case, whether he is able to furnish
an explanation of his own or whether he sees nothing in it that needs explaining.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4009

We therefore come back to our hypothesis that the Devil with whom the painter signed the bond was a
direct substitute for his father. And this is borne out by the shape in which the Devil first appeared to him as an honest elderly citizen with a brown beard, dressed in a red cloak and leaning with his right hand on a
stick, with a black dog beside him¹ (cf. the first picture). Later on his appearance grows more and more
terrifying - more mythological, one might say. He is equipped with horns, eagle’s claws and bat’s wings.
Finally he appears in the chapel as a flying dragon. We shall have to come back later to a particular detail
of his bodily shape.
It does indeed sound strange that the Devil should be chosen as a substitute for a loved father. But this is
only so at first sight, for we know a good many things which lessen our surprise. To begin with, we know
that God is a father-substitute; or, more correctly, that he is an exalted father; or, yet again, that he is a
copy of a father as he is seen and experienced in childhood - by individuals in their own childhood and by
mankind in its prehistory as the father of the primitive and primal horde. Later on in life the individual sees
his father as something different and lesser. But the ideational image belonging to his childhood is
preserved and becomes merged with the inherited memory-traces of the primal father to form the
individual’s idea of God. We also know, from the secret life of the individual which analysis uncovers, that
his relation to his father was perhaps ambivalent from the outset, or, at any rate, soon became so. That is
to say, it contained two sets of emotional impulses that were opposed to each other: it contained not only
impulses of an affectionate and submissive nature, but also hostile and defiant ones. It is our view that the
same ambivalence governs the relations of mankind to its Deity. The unresolved conflict between, on the
one hand, a longing for the father and, on the other, a fear of him and a son’s defiance of him, has
furnished us with an explanation of important characteristics of religion and decisive vicissitudes in it.²
¹ In Goethe, a black dog like this turns into the Devil himself.
² Cf. Totem and Taboo (1912-13) and Reik (1919).

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4010

Concerning the Evil Demon, we know that he is regarded as the antithesis of God and yet is very close to
him in his nature. His history has not been so well studied as that of God; not all religions have adopted the
Evil Spirit, the opponent of God, and his prototype in the life of the individual has so far remained obscure.
One thing, however, is certain: gods can turn into evil demons when new gods oust them. When one
people has been conquered by another, their fallen gods not seldom turn into demons in the eyes of the
conquerors. The evil demon of the Christian faith - the Devil of the Middle Ages - was, according to
Christian mythology, himself a fallen angel and of a godlike nature. It does not need much analytic
perspicacity to guess that God and the Devil were originally identical - were a single figure which was later
split into two figures with opposite attributes.¹ In the earliest ages of religion God himself still possessed all
the terrifying features which were afterwards combined to form a counterpart of him.
We have here an example of the process, with which we are familiar, by which an idea that has a
contradictory - an ambivalent - content becomes divided into two sharply contrasted opposites. The
contradictions in the original nature of God are, however, a reflection of the ambivalence which governs the
relation of the individual to his personal father. If the benevolent and righteous God is a substitute for his
father, it is not to be wondered at that his hostile attitude to his father, too, which is one of hating and
fearing him and of making complaints against him, should have come to expression in the creation of
Satan. Thus the father, it seems, is the individual prototype of both God and the Devil. But we should
expect religions to bear ineffaceable marks of the fact that the primitive primal father was a being of
unlimited evil - a being less like God than the Devil.
¹ Cf. Reik, 1923, Chapter VII.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4011

It is true that it is by no means easy to demonstrate the traces of this satanic view of the father in the
mental life of the individual. When a boy draws grotesque faces and caricatures, we may no doubt be able
to show that he is jeering at his father in them; and when a person of either sex is afraid of robbers and
burglars at night, it is not hard to recognize these as split off portions of the father.¹ The animals, too, which
appear in children’s animal phobias are most often father-substitutes, as were the totem animals of
primaeval times. But that the Devil is a duplicate of the father and can act as a substitute for him has not
been shown so clearly elsewhere as in the demonological neurosis of this seventeenth-century painter.
That is why, at the beginning of this paper, I foretold that a demonological case history of this kind would
yield in the form of pure metal material which, in the neuroses of a later epoch (no longer superstitious but
hypochondriacal instead) has to be laboriously extracted by analytic work from the ore of free associations
and symptoms.² A deeper penetration into the analysis of our painter’s illness will probably bring stronger
conviction. It is no unusual thing for a man to acquire a melancholic depression and an inhibition in his work
as a result of his father’s death. When this happens, we conclude that the man had been attached to his
father with an especially strong love, and we remember how often a severe melancholia appears as a
neurotic form of mourning.
¹ In the familiar fairy tale of ‘The Seven Little Goats’, the Father Wolf appears as a burglar.
² The fact that in our analyses we so seldom succeed in finding the Devil as a father-substitute may be an indication
that for those who come to us for analysis this figure from mediaeval mythology has long since played out its part. For
the pious Christian of earlier centuries belief in the Devil was no less a duty than belief in God. In point of fact, he
needed the Devil in order to be able to keep hold of God. The later decrease in faith has, for various reasons, first and
foremost affected the figure of the Devil.
If we are bold enough to apply this idea of the Devil as a father substitute to cultural history, we may also be able to
see the witch-trials of the Middle Ages in a new light.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4012

In this we are undoubtedly right. But we are not right if we conclude further that this relation has been
merely one of love. On the contrary, his mourning over the loss of his father is the more likely to turn into
melancholia, the more his attitude to him bore the stamp of ambivalence. This emphasis on ambivalence,
however, prepares us for the possibility of the father being subjected to a debasement, as we see
happening in the painter’s demonological neurosis. If we were able to learn as much about Christoph
Haizmann as about a patient undergoing an analysis with us, it would be an easy matter to elicit this
ambivalence, to get him to remember when and under what provocations he was given cause to fear and
hate his father; and, above all, to discover what were the accidental factors that were added to the typical
motives for a hatred of the father which are necessarily inherent in the natural relationship of son to father.
Perhaps we might then find a special explanation for the painter’s inhibition in work. It is possible that his
father had opposed his wish to become a painter. If that was so, his inability to practise his art after his
father’s death would on the one hand be an expression of the familiar phenomenon of ‘deferred obedience’;
and, on the other hand, by making him incapable of earning a livelihood, it would be bound to increase his
longing for his father as a protector from the cares of life. In its aspect as deferred obedience it would also
be an expression of remorse and a successful self-punishment.
Since, however, we cannot carry out an analysis of this sort with Christoph Haizmann, who died in the
year 1700, we must content ourselves with bringing out those features of his case history which may point
to the typical exciting causes of a negative attitude to the father. There are only a few such features, nor are
they very striking, but they are of great interest.
Let us first consider the part played by the number nine. The pact with the Evil One was for nine years.
On this point the unquestionably trustworthy report by the village priest of Pottenbrunn is quite clear: pro
novem annis Syngraphen scriptam tradidit. This letter of introduction, dated September 1, 1677, is also able
to inform us that the appointed time was about to expire in a few days: quorum et finis 24 mensis hujus
futurus appropinquat. The pact would therefore have been signed on September 24, 1668.¹ In the same
report, indeed, yet another use is made of the number nine. The painter claims to have withstood the
temptations of the Evil One nine times - ‘nonies’ - before he yielded to him. This detail is no longer
mentioned in the later reports. In the Abbot’s deposition the phrase ‘pos annos novem’ is used, and the
compiler repeats ‘ad novem annos’ in his summary - a proof that this number was not regarded as
indifferent.
¹ The contradictory fact that both the pacts as transcribed bear the date 1669 will be considered later.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4013

The number nine is well known to us from neurotic phantasies. It is the number of the months of
pregnancy, and wherever it appears it directs our attention to a phantasy of pregnancy. In our painter’s
case, to be sure, the number refers to years, not months; and it will be objected that nine is a significant
number in other ways as well. But who knows whether it may not in general owe a good deal of its sanctity
to the part it plays in pregnancy? Nor need we be disconcerted by the change from nine months to nine
years. We know from dreams what liberties ‘unconscious mental activity’ takes with numbers. If, for
instance, the number five occurs in a dream, this can invariably be traced back to a five that is important in
waking life; but whereas in waking life the five was a five years’ difference in age or a company of five
people, it appeared in the dream as five bank-notes or five fruits. That is to say, the number is kept, but its
denominator is changed according to the requirements of condensation and displacement. Nine years in a
dream could thus easily correspond to nine months in real life. The dream-work plays about with the
numbers of waking life in another way, too, for it shows a sovereign disregard for noughts and does not
treat them as numbers at all. Five dollars in a dream can stand for fifty or five hundred or five thousand
dollars in reality.
Another detail in the painter’s relations to the Devil has once more a sexual reference. On the first
occasion, as I have mentioned, he saw the Evil One in the shape of an honest citizen. But already on the
second occasion the Devil was naked and misshapen, and had two pairs of female breasts. In none of his
subsequent apparitions are the breasts absent, either as a single or a double pair. Only in one of them does
the Devil exhibit, in addition to the breasts, a large penis ending in a snake. This stressing of the female
sexual character by introducing large pendulous breasts (there is never any indication of the female
genitals) is bound to appear to us as a striking contradiction of our hypothesis that the Devil had the
meaning of a father-substitute for the painter. And, indeed, such a way of representing the Devil is in itself
unusual. Where ‘devil’ is thought of in a generic sense, and devils appear in numbers, there is nothing
strange about depicting female devils; but that the Devil, who is a great individuality, the Lord of Hell and
the Adversary of God, should be represented otherwise than as a male, and, indeed, as a super-male, with
horns, tail and a big penis-snake - this, I believe, is never found.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4014

These two slight indications give us an idea of what the typical factor is which determines the negative
side of the painter’s relation to his father. What he is rebelling against is his feminine attitude to him which
culminates in a phantasy of bearing him a child (the nine years). We have an accurate knowledge of this
resistance from our analyses, where it takes on very strange forms in the transference and gives us a great
deal of trouble. With the painter’s mourning for his lost father, and the heightening of his longing for him,
there also comes about in him a re-activation of his long-since repressed phantasy of pregnancy, and he is
obliged to defend himself against it by a neurosis and by debasing his father.
But why should his father, after being reduced to the status of a Devil, bear this physical mark of a
woman? The feature seems at first hard to interpret; but soon we find two explanations which compete with
each other without being mutually exclusive. A boy’s feminine attitude to his father undergoes repression as
soon as he understands that his rivalry with a woman for his father’s love has as a precondition the loss of
his own male genitals - in other words, castration. Repudiation of the feminine attitude is thus the result of a
revolt against castration. It regularly finds its strongest expression in the converse phantasy of castrating
the father, of turning him into a woman. Thus the Devil’s breasts would correspond to a projection of the
subject’s own femininity on to the father-substitute. The second explanation of these female additions to the
Devil’s body no longer has a hostile meaning but an affectionate one. It sees in the adoption of this shape
an indication that the child’s tender feelings towards his mother have been displaced on to his father; and
this suggests that there has previously been a strong fixation on the mother, which, in its turn, is
responsible for part of the child’s hostility towards his father. Large breasts are the positive sexual
characteristics of the mother even at a time when the negative characteristic of the female - her lack of a
penis - is as yet unknown to the child. ¹
¹ Cf. Leonardo da Vinci and a Memory of his Childhood (1910c).

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4015

If our painter’s repugnance to accepting castration made it impossible for him to appease his longing for
his father, it is perfectly understandable that he should have turned for help and salvation to the image of
his mother. This is why he declared that only the Holy Mother of God of Mariazell could release him from
his pact with the Devil and why he obtained his freedom once more on the day of the Mother’s Nativity
(September 8). Whether the day on which the pact was made - September 24 - was not also determined in
some similar way, we shall of course never know.
Among the observations made by psycho-analysis of the mental life of children there is scarcely one
which sounds so repugnant and unbelievable to a normal adult as that of a boy’s feminine attitude to his
father and the phantasy of pregnancy that arises from it. It is only since Senatspräsident Daniel Paul
Schreber, a judge presiding over a division of the Appeal Court of Saxony, published the history of his
psychotic illness and his extensive recovery from it,¹ that we can discuss the subject without trepidation or
apology. We learn from this invaluable book that, somewhere about the age of fifty, the Senatspräsident
became firmly convinced that God - who, incidentally, exhibited distinct traits of his father, the worthy
physician, Dr. Schreber - had decided to emasculate him, to use him as a woman, and to beget from him ‘a
new race of men born from the spirit of Schreber’. (His own marriage was childless.) In his revolt against
this intention of God’s, which seemed to him highly unjust and ‘contrary to the Order of Things’, he fell ill
with symptoms of paranoia, which, however, underwent a process of involution in the course of years,
leaving only a small residue behind. The gifted author of his own case history could not have guessed that
in it he had uncovered a typical pathogenic factor.
¹ Denkwürdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken, 1903. See my analysis of his case (1911c).

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4016

This revolt against castration or a feminine attitude has been torn out of its organic context by Alfred
Adler. He has linked it superficially or falsely with the longing for power, and has postulated it as an
independent ‘masculine protest’. Since a neurosis can only arise from a conflict between two trends, it is as
justifiable to see the cause of ‘every’ neurosis in the masculine protest as it is to see it in the feminine
attitude against which the protest is being made. It is quite true that this masculine protest plays a regular
part in the formation of character - in some types of people a very large part - and that we meet it in the
analysis of neurotic men as a vigorous resistance. Psycho-analysis has attached due importance to the
masculine protest in connection with the castration complex, without being able to accept its omnipotence
or its omnipresence in neuroses. The most marked case of a masculine protest with all its manifest
reactions and character-traits that I have met with in analysis was that of a patient who came to me for
treatment on account of an obsessional neurosis in whose symptoms the unresolved conflict between a
masculine and a feminine attitude (fear of castration and desire for castration) found clear expression. In
addition, the patient had developed masochistic phantasies which were wholly derived from a wish to
accept castration; and he had even gone beyond these phantasies to real satisfaction in perverse
situations. The whole of his state rested - like Adler’s theory itself - on the repression and denial of early
infantile fixations of love.
Senatspräsident Schreber found the way to recovery when he decided to give up his resistance to
castration and to accommodate himself to the feminine role cast for him by God. After this, he became lucid
and calm, was able to put through his own discharge from the asylum and led a normal life - with the one
exception that he devoted some hours every day to the cultivation of his femaleness, of whose gradual
advance towards the goal determined by God he remained convinced.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4017

IV
THE TWO BONDS
A remarkable detail in our painter’s story is the statement that he signed two different bonds with the
Devil. The first, written in black ink, ran as follows:
‘I, Chr. H., subscribe myself to this Lord as his bounden son till the ninth year.’
The second, written in blood, ran:
‘Chr. H. I sign a bond with this Satan, to be his bounden son, and in the ninth year to belong to him body
and soul.’
The originals of both are said to have been in the archives at Mariazell when the Trophaeum was
compiled, and both bear the same date - 1669.
I have already made a number of references to the two bonds; and I now propose to deal with them in
greater detail, although it is precisely here that the danger of overvaluing trifles seems especially great.
It is unusual for anyone to sign a bond with the Devil twice, in such a way that the first document is
replaced by the second, but without losing its own validity. Perhaps this occurrence is less surprising to
other people, who are more at home with demonological material. For my part, I could only look on it as a
special peculiarity of our case, and my suspicions were aroused when I found that the reports were at
variance precisely on this point. Examination of these discrepancies will afford us, unexpectedly, a deeper
understanding of the case history.
The village priest of Pottenbrunn’s letter of introduction describes a very simple and clear situation. In it
mention is only made of one bond, which was written in blood by the painter nine years before and which
was due to expire in a few days’ time - on September 24. It must therefore have been drawn up on
September 24, 1668; unfortunately this date, although it can be inferred with certainty, is not explicitly
stated.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4018

The Abbot Franciscus’s deposition, which was dated, as we know, a few days later (September 12,
1677), already describes a more complicated state of affairs. It is plausible to assume that the painter had
given more precise information in the interval. The deposition relates that the painter had signed two bonds:
one in the year 1668 (a date which should also be the correct one according to the letter of introduction),
written in black ink, and the other ‘sequenti anno 1669’, written in blood. The bond that he received back on
the day of the Nativity of the Virgin was the one written in blood - viz. the later bond, which had been signed
in 1669. This does not emerge from the Abbot’s deposition, for there it merely says later ‘schedam redderet’
and ‘schedam sibi porrigentem conspexisset’ as if there could only be a single document in question. But it
does follow from the subsequent course of the story, and also from the coloured title-page of the
Tropheaum, where what is clearly a red script can be seen on the paper which the demon dragon is
holding. The further course of the story is, as I have already related, that the painter returned to Mariazell in
May, 1678, after he had experienced further temptations from the Evil One in Vienna; and that he begged
that, through a further act of Grace on the part of the Holy Mother, the first document, written in ink, might
also be given back to him. In what way this came about is not so fully described as on the first occasion.
We are merely told: ‘quâ juxta votum redditâ’; and in another passage the compiler says that this particular
bond was thrown to the painter by the Devil ‘crumpled up and torn into four pieces’ on May 9, 1678, at
about nine o’clock in the evening.
Both bonds, however, bear the date of the same year - 1669.
This incompatibility is either of no significance or may put us on the following track.
If we take as a starting-point the Abbot’s account, as being the more detailed one, we are confronted with
a number of difficulties. When Christoph Haizmann confessed to the village priest of Pottenbrunn that he
was hard pressed by the Devil and that the time-limit would soon run out, he could only (in 1677) have been
thinking of the bond which he had signed in 1668 - namely, the first one, written in black (which is referred
to in the letter of introduction as the only one, but is described there being written in blood). But a few days
later, at Mariazell, he was only concerned to get back the later bond, in blood, which was not nearly due to
expire then (1669-77), and allowed the first one to become overdue. This latter was not reclaimed till 1678 that is, when it had run into its tenth year. Furthermore, why are both the bonds dated in the same year
(1669), when one of them is explicitly attributed to the following year (‘anno subsequenti’)?

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4019

The compiler must have noticed these difficulties, for he made an attempt to remove them. In his preface
he adopted the Abbot’s version, but he modified it in one particular. The painter, he says, signed a bond
with the Devil in 1669 in ink, but afterwards (‘deinde vero’) in blood. He thus overrode the express
statement of both reports that one bond was signed in 1668, and he ignored the Abbot’s remark in his
deposition to the effect that there was a difference in the year-number between the two bonds. This he did
in order to keep in harmony with the dating of the two documents that were given back by the Devil.
In the Abbot’s deposition a passage appears in brackets after the words ‘sequenti vero anno 1669’. It
runs: ‘sumitur hic alter annus pro nondum completo, uti saepe in loquendo fieri solet, nam eundem annum
indicant syngraphae, quarum atramento scripta ante praesentem attestationem nondum habita fuit.’ This
passage is clearly an interpolation by the compiler; for the Abbot, who had only seen one bond, could not
have stated that both bore the same date. The placing of the passage in brackets, moreover, must have
been intended to show that it was an addition to the text of the deposition. It represents another attempt on
the compiler’s part to reconcile the incompatible evidence. He agrees that the first bond was signed in
1668; but he thinks that, since the year was already far advanced (it was September), the painter had postdated it by a year so that both bonds were able to show the same year. His invoking the fact that people
often do the same sort of thing in conversation seems to me to stamp his whole attempt at an explanation
as no more than a feeble evasion.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4020

I cannot tell whether my presentation of the case has made any impression on the reader and whether it
has put him in a position to take an interest in these minute details. I myself have found it impossible to
arrive with any certainty at the true state of affairs; but, in studying this confused business, I hit upon a
notion which has the advantage of giving the most natural picture of the course of events, even though
once more the written evidence does not entirely fit in with it.
My view is that when the painter first came to Mariazell he spoke only of one bond, written in the regular
way in blood, which was about to fall due and which had therefore been signed in September, 1668 - all
exactly as described in the village priest’s letter of introduction. In Mariazell, too, he presented this bond in
blood as the one which the Demon had given back to him under compulsion from the Holy Mother. We
know what happened subsequently. The painter left the shrine soon afterwards and went to Vienna, where
he felt free till the middle of October. Then, however, he began once more to be subjected to sufferings and
apparitions, in which he saw the work of the Evil Spirit. He again felt in need of redemption, but was faced
with the difficulty of explaining why the exorcism in the holy Chapel had not brought him a lasting
deliverance. He would certainly not have been welcome at Mariazell if he had returned there uncured and
relapsed. In this quandary, he invented an earlier, first bond, which, however, was to be written in ink, so
that its supersession in favour of a later bond, written in blood, should seem more plausible. Having
returned to Mariazell, he had this alleged first bond given back to him too. After this he was left in peace by
the Evil One; but at the same time he did something else, which will show us what lay in the background of
his neurosis.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4021

The drawings he made were undoubtedly executed during his second stay at Mariazell: the title-page,
which is a single composition, contains a representation of both the bond scenes. The attempt to make his
new story tally with his earlier one may well have caused him embarrassment. It was unfortunate for him
that his additional invention could only be of an earlier bond and not of a later one. Thus he could not avoid
the awkward result that he had redeemed one - the blood bond - too soon (in the eighth year), and the
other - the black bond - too late (in the tenth year). And he betrayed the double editing of the story by
making a mistake in the dating of the bonds and attributing the earlier one as well as the later to the year
1669. This mistake has the significance of a piece of unintentional honesty: it enables us to guess that the
supposedly earlier bond was fabricated at the later date. The compiler, who certainly did not begin revising
the material before 1714, and perhaps not till 1729, had to do his best to resolve its not inconsiderable
contradictions. Finding that both the bonds before him were dated 1669, he had recourse to the evasion
which he interpolated in the Abbot’s deposition.
It is easy to see where the weak spot lies in this otherwise attractive reconstruction. Reference is already
made to the existence of two bonds, one in black and one in blood, in the Abbot’s deposition. I therefore
have the choice between accusing the compiler of having also made an alteration in the deposition, an
alteration closely related to his interpolation, or confessing that I am unable to unravel the tangle.¹
¹ The compiler, it seems to me, was between two fires. On the one hand, he found, in the village priest’s letter of
introduction as well as in the Abbot’s deposition, the statement that the bond (or at any rate the first bond) had been
signed in 1668; on the other hand, both bonds, which had been preserved in the archives, bore the date 1669. As he
had two bonds before him, it seemed certain to him that two bonds had been signed. If, as I believe, the Abbot’s
deposition mentioned only one bond, he was obliged to insert in the deposition a reference to the other and then
remove the contradiction by the hypothesis of the post-dating. The textual alteration which he made occurs immediately
before the interpolation, which can only have been written by him. He was obliged to link the interpolation to the
alteration with the words ‘sequenti vero anno 1669’, since the painter had expressly written in his (very much damaged)
caption to the title-page:
‘A year after He
... terrible threatenings in
... shape No. 2, was forced
... to sign a bond in blood.’
The painter’s blunder in writing his Syngraphae - a blunder which I have been obliged to assume in my attempted
explanation - appears to me to be no less interesting than are the actual bonds.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4022

The reader will long ago have judged this whole discussion superfluous and the details concerned in it too
unimportant. But the matter gains a new interest if it is pursued in a certain direction.
I have just expressed the view that, when the painter was disagreeably surprised by the course taken by
his illness, he invented an earlier bond (the one in ink) in order to be able to maintain his position with the
reverend Fathers at Mariazell. Now I am writing for readers who, although they believe in psycho-analysis,
do not believe in the Devil; and they might object that it was absurd for me to bring such an accusation
against the poor wretch - hunc miserum, as he is called in the letter of introduction. For, they will say, the
bond in blood was just as much a product of his phantasy as the allegedly earlier one in ink. In reality, no
Devil appeared to him at all, and the whole business of pacts with the Devil only existed in his imagination. I
quite realize this: the poor man cannot be denied the right to supplement his original phantasy with a new
one, if altered circumstances seem to require it.
But here, too, the matter goes further. After all, the two bonds were not phantasies like the visions of the
Devil. They were documents, preserved, according to the assurances of the copyist and the deposition of
the later Abbot Kilian, in the archives of Mariazell, for all to see and touch. We are therefore in a dilemma.
Either we must assume that both the papers which were supposed to have been given back to the painter
through divine Grace were written by him at the time when he needed them; or else, despite all the solemn
assurances, the confirmatory evidence of witnesses, signed and sealed, and so on, we shall be obliged to
deny the credibility of the reverend Fathers of Mariazell and St. Lambert. I must admit that I am unwilling to
cast doubts on the Fathers. I am inclined to think, it is true, that the compiler, in the interests of consistency,
has falsified some things in the deposition made by the first Abbot; but a ‘secondary revision’ such as this
does not go much beyond what is carried out even by modern lay historians, and at all events it was done
in good faith. In another respect, the reverend Fathers have established a good claim to our confidence. As
I have said already there was nothing to prevent them from suppressing the accounts of the
incompleteness of the cure and the continuance of the temptations. And even the description of the scene
of exorcism in the Chapel, which one might have viewed with some apprehension, is soberly written and
inspires belief. So there is nothing for it but to lay the blame on the painter. No doubt he had the red bond
with him when he went to penitential prayer in the Chapel, and he produced it afterwards as he came back
to his spiritual assistants from his meeting with the Demon. Nor need it have been the same paper which
was later preserved in the archives, and, according to our construction, it may have borne the date 1668
(nine years before the exorcism).

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4023

V
THE FURTHER COURSE OF THE NEUROSIS
But if this is so, we should be dealing not with a neurosis but with a deception, and the painter would be a
malingerer and forger instead of a sick man suffering from possession. But the transitional stages between
neurosis and malingering are, as we know, very fluid. Nor do I see any difficulty in supposing that the
painter wrote this paper and the later one, and took them with him, in a peculiar state, similar to the one in
which he had his visions. Indeed there was no other course open to him if he wished to carry into effect his
phantasy of his pact with the Devil and of his redemption.
On the other hand, the diary written in Vienna, which he gave to the clerics on his second visit to
Mariazell, bears the stamp of veracity. It undoubtedly affords us a deep insight into the motivation - or let us
rather say, the exploitation - of the neurosis.
The entries extend from the time of the successful exorcism till January 13 of the following year, 1678.
Until October 11 he felt very well in Vienna, where he lived with a married sister; but after that he had
fresh attacks, with visions, convulsions, loss of consciousness and painful sensations, and these finally led
to his return to Mariazell in May, 1678.
The story of his fresh illness falls into three phases. First, temptation appeared in the form of a finely
dressed cavalier, who tried to persuade him to throw away the document attesting his admission to the
Brotherhood of the Holy Rosary. He resisted this temptation, whereupon the same thing happened next
day; only this time the scene was laid in a magnificently decorated hall in which grand gentlemen were
dancing with beautiful ladies. The same cavalier who had tempted him before made a proposal to him
connected with painting¹ and promised to give him a handsome sum of money in return. After he had made
this vision disappear by prayer, it was repeated once more a few days later, in a still more pressing form.
This time the cavalier sent one of the most beautiful of the ladies who sat at the banqueting table to him to
persuade him to join their company, and he had difficulty in defending himself from the temptress. Most
terrifying of all, moreover, was the vision which occurred soon after this. He saw a still more magnificent
hall, in which there was a ‘throne built up of gold pieces’. Cavaliers were standing about awaiting the arrival
of their King. The same person who had so often made proposals to him now approached him and
summoned him to ascend the throne, for they ‘wanted to have him for their King and to honour him for
ever’. This extravagant phantasy concluded the first, perfectly transparent, phase of the story of his
temptation.
¹ This passage is unintelligible to me.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4024

There was bound to be a revulsion against this. An ascetic reaction reared its head. On October 20 a
great light appeared, and a voice came from it, making itself known as Christ, and commanded him to
forswear this wicked world and serve God in the wilderness for six years. The painter clearly suffered more
from these holy apparitions than from the earlier demoniacal ones; it was only after two and a half hours
that he awoke from this attack. In the next attack the holy figure surrounded by light was much more
unfriendly. He issued threats against him for not having obeyed the divine behest and led him down into
Hell so that he might be terrified by the fate of the damned. Evidently, however, this failed in its effect, for
the apparitions of the figure surrounded by light, which purported to be Christ, were repeated several more
times. Each time the painter underwent an absence and an ecstasy lasting for hours. In the grandest of
these ecstasies the figure surrounded by light took him first into a town in whose streets people were
perpetrating all the acts of darkness; and then, in contrast, took him to a lovely meadow in which anchorites
were leading a godly life and were receiving tangible evidence of God’s grace and care. There then
appeared, instead of Christ, the Holy Mother herself, who, reminding him of what she had already done on
his behalf, called on him to obey the command of her dear Son. ‘Since he could not truly resolve so to do’,
Christ appeared to him again the next day and upbraided him soundly with threats and promises. At last he
gave way and made up his mind to leave the world and to do what was required of him. With this decision,
the second phase ended. The painter states that from this time onwards he had no more visions and no
more temptations.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4025

Nevertheless, his resolution cannot have been firm enough or he must have delayed its execution too
long; for while he was in the midst of his devotions, on December 26, in St. Stephen’s, catching sight of a
strapping young woman accompanied by a smartly dressed gentleman, he could not fend off the thought
that he might himself be in this gentleman’s place. This called for punishment, and that very evening it over
took him like a thunderbolt. He saw himself in bright flames and sank down in a swoon. Attempts were
made to rouse him but he rolled about in the room till blood flowed from his mouth and nose. He felt that he
was surrounded by heat and noisome smells, and he heard a voice say that he had been condemned to
this state as a punishment for his vain and idle thoughts. Later he was scourged with ropes by Evil Spirits,
and was told that he would be tormented like this every day until he had decided to enter the Order of
Anchorites. These experiences continued up to the last entry in his diary (January 13).
We see how our unfortunate painter’s phantasies of temptation were succeeded by ascetic ones and
finally by phantasies of punishment. The end of his tale of suffering we know already. In May he went to
Mariazell, told his story of an earlier bond written in black ink, to which he explicitly attributed his continued
torment by the Devil, received this bond back, too, and was cured.
During his second stay there he painted the pictures which are copied in the Trophaeum. Then he took a
step which was in keeping with the demands of the ascetic phase of his diary. He did not, it is true, go into
the wilderness to become an anchorite, but he joined the Order of the Brothers Hospitallers: religiosus
factus est.
Reading the diary, we gain insight into another part of the story. It will be remembered that the painter
signed a bond with the Devil because after his father’s death, feeling depressed and unable to work, he
was worried about making a livelihood. These factors of depression, inhibition in his work and mourning for
his father are somehow connected with one another, whether in a simple or a complicated way. Perhaps
the reason why the apparitions of the Devil were so over-generously furnished with breasts was that the
Evil One was meant to become his foster father. This hope was not fulfilled, and the painter continued to be
in a bad state. He could not work properly, or he was out of luck and could not find enough employment.
The village priest’s letter of introduction speaks of him as ‘hunc miserum omni auxilio destitutum’. He was
thus not only in moral straits but was suffering material want. In the account of his later visions, we find
remarks here and there indicating - as do the contents of the scenes described - that even after the
successful first exorcism, nothing had been changed in his situation. We come to know him as a man who
fails in everything and who is therefore trusted by no one. In his first vision the cavalier asked him ‘what he
is going to do, since he has no one to stand by him’. The first series of visions in Vienna tallied completely
with the wishful phantasies of a poor man, who had come down in the world and who hungered for
enjoyment: magnificent halls, high living, a silver dinner-service and beautiful women. Here we find what
was missing in his relations with the Devil made good. At that time he had been in a melancholia which
made him unable to enjoy anything and obliged him to reject the most attractive offers. After the exorcism
the melancholia seems to have been overcome and all his worldly-minded desires had once more become
active.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4026

In one of the ascetic visions he complained to his guide (Christ) that nobody had any faith in him, so that
he was unable to carry out the commands laid upon him. The reply he was given is, unfortunately, obscure
to us: ‘Although they will not believe me, yet I know well what has happened, but I am not able to declare it.’
Especially illuminating, however, are the experiences which his heavenly Guide made him have among the
anchorites. He came to a cave in which an old man had been sitting for the last sixty years, and in answer
to a question he learnt that this old man had been fed every day by God’s angels. And then he saw for
himself how an angel brought the old man food: ‘Three dishes with food, a loaf, a dumpling and some
drink.’ After the anchorite had eaten, the angel collected everything and carried it away. We can see what
the temptation was which the pious visions offered the painter: they were meant to induce him to adopt a
mode of existence in which he need no longer worry about sustenance. The utterances of Christ in the last
vision are also worthy of note. After threatening that, if he did not prove amenable, something would
happen which would oblige him and the people to believe [in it], Christ gave him a direct warning that ‘I
should not heed the people; even if they were to persecute me or give me no help, God would not abandon
me’.
Christoph Haizmann was enough of an artist and a child of the world to find it difficult to renounce this
sinful world. Nevertheless, in view of his helpless position, he did so in the end. He entered a Holy Order.
With this, both his internal struggle and his material need came to an end. In his neurosis, this outcome was
reflected in the fact of his seizures and visions being brought to an end by the return of an alleged first
bond. Actually, both portions of his demonological illness had the same meaning. He wanted all along
simply to make his life secure. He tried first to achieve this with the help of the Devil at the cost of his
salvation; and when this failed and had to be given up, he tried to achieve it with the help of the clergy at
the cost of his freedom and most of the possibilities of enjoyment in life. Perhaps he himself was only a
poor devil who simply had no luck; perhaps he was too ineffective or too untalented to make a living, and
was one of those types of people who are known as ‘eternal sucklings’ - who cannot tear themselves away
from the blissful situation at the mother’s breast, and who, all through their lives, persist in a demand to be
nourished by someone else. - And so it was that, in this history of his illness, he followed the path which led
from his father, by way of the Devil as a father substitute, to the pious Fathers of the Church.
To superficial observation Haizmann’s neurosis appears to be a masquerade which overlays a part of the
serious, if commonplace, struggle for existence. This is not always the case, but it is not infrequently so.
Analysts often discover how unprofitable it is to treat a business man who ‘though otherwise in good health,
has for some time shown signs of a neurosis’. The business catastrophe with which he feels himself
threatened throws up the neurosis as a by-product; and this gives him the advantage of being able to
conceal his worries about his real life behind his symptoms. But apart from this the neurosis serves no
useful purpose whatever, since it uses up forces which would have been more profitably employed in
dealing rationally with the dangerous situation.

A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis
4027

In a far greater number of cases the neurosis is more autonomous and more independent of the interests
of self-preservation and self-maintenance. In the conflict which creates the neurosis, what are at stake are
either solely libidinal interests or libidinal interests in intimate connections with self-preservative ones. In all
three instances the dynamics of the neurosis are the same. A dammed-up libido which cannot be satisfied
in reality succeeds, with the help of a regression to old fixations, in finding discharge through the repressed
unconscious. The sick man’s ego, in so far as it can extract a ‘gain from illness’ out of this process,
countenances the neurosis, although there can be no doubt of its injuriousness in its economic aspect.
Nor would our painter’s wretched situation in life have provoked a demonological neurosis in him if his
material need had not intensified his longing for his father. After his melancholia and the Devil had been
disposed of, however, he still had to face a struggle between his libidinal enjoyment of life and his
realization that the interests of self-preservation called imperatively for renunciation and asceticism. It is
interesting to see that the painter was very well aware of the unity of the two portions of his illness, for he
attributed both to the bonds which he had signed with the Devil. On the other hand, he made no sharp
distinction between the operations of the Evil Spirit and those of the Divine Powers. He had only one
description for both: they were manifestations of the Devil.

