4617  
 
NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHO-ANALYSIS  
(1933) 
 4618  
 
Intentionally left blank 
 4619  
 
PREFACE 
 
My Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis  were delivered during the two Winter Terms of 1915-16 and 
1916-17 in a lecture room of the Vienna Psychiatric Clinic before an audience gathered from all the Faculties of the University. The first half of the le ctures were improvised, and written out immediately 
afterwards; drafts of the second half were made during the intervening summer vacation at Salzburg, and delivered word for word in the following winter. At that time I still possessed the gift of a phonographic memory. 
   These new lectures, unlike the former ones, have never been delivered. My age had in the meantime 
absolved me from the obligation of giving expression to my membership of the University (which was in any 
case a peripheral one) by delivering lectures; and a surgical operation had made speaking in public 
impossible for me. If, therefore, I once more take my place in the lecture room during the remarks that 
follow, it is only by an artifice of the imagination; it may help me not to forget to bear the reader in mind as I enter more deeply into my subject.    The new lectures are by no means intended to take the place of the earlier ones. They do not in any 
sense form an independent entity with an expectation of finding a circle of readers of its own; they are 
continuations and supplements, which, in relation to the former series, fall into three groups. A first group contains fresh treatments of subjects which were alr eady dealt with fifteen years ago but which, as a result 
of a deepening of our knowledge and an alteration in our views, call for a different exposition to-day - that is to say, critical revisions. The two other groups contain what are true extensions, for they deal with things which either did not exist in psycho-analysis at the time of the first lectures or which were too little in 
evidence to justify a special chapter-heading. It is inevitable, but not to be regretted, if some of the new 
lectures unite the characteristics of more than one of these groups.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4620  
 
   I have also given expression to the dependence of these new lectures on the Introductory Lectures by 
giving them a numbering continuous with theirs. The first lecture in this volume is accordingly called No. 
XXIX. Like their predecessors, they offer the professional analyst little that is new; they are addressed to the multitude of educated people to whom we may perhaps attribute a benevolent, even though cautious, 
interest in the characteristics and discoveries of the young science. This time once again it has been my 
chief aim to make no sacrifice to an appearance of being simple, complete or rounded-off, not to disguise problems and not to deny the existence of gaps and uncerta inties. In no other field of scientific work would 
it be necessary to boast of such modest intentions. They are universally regarded as self-evident; the public 
expects nothing else. No reader of an account of as tronomy will feel disappointed and contemptuous of the 
science if he is shown the frontiers at which our knowledge of the universe melts into haziness. Only in 
psychology is it otherwise. There mankind’s constitutional unfitness for scientific research comes fully into 
the open. What people seem to demand of psychology is not progress in knowledge, but satisfactions of 
some other sort; every unsolved problem, every admitted uncertainty is made into a reproach against it. 
   Whoever cares for the science of mental life must accept these injustices along with it. 
           
FREUD    
VIENNA , Summer  1932  
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4621  
 
LECTURE XXIX 
 
REVISION OF THE THEORY OF DREAMS 
 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN , - If, after an interval of more than fifteen years, I have brought you together again 
to discuss with you what novelties, and what improvements it may be, the intervening time has introduced 
into psycho-analysis, it is right and fitting from more than one point of view that we should turn our attention first to the position of the theory of dreams. It occupies a special place in the history of psycho-analysis and 
marks a turning-point; it was with it that analysis took the step from being a psychotherapeutic procedure to 
being a depth-psychology. Since then, too, the theory of dreams has remained what is most characteristic and peculiar about the young science, something to which there is no counterpart in the rest of our 
knowledge, a stretch of new country, which has been reclaimed from popular beliefs and mysticism. The 
strangeness of the assertions it was obliged to put forward has made it play the part of a shibboleth, the use of which decided who could become a follower of psycho-analysis and to whom it remained forever incomprehensible. I myself found it a sheet-anchor during those difficult times when the unrecognized facts 
of the neuroses used to confuse my inexperi enced judgement. Whenever I began to have doubts of the 
correctness of my wavering conclusions, the successful transformation of a senseless and muddled dream 
into a logical and intelligible mental process in the dreamer would renew my confidence of being on the 
right track. 
   It is therefore of special interest to us, in the particular instance of the theory of dreams, on the one hand to follow the vicissitudes through which psycho-analysis has passed during this interval, and on the other 
hand to learn what advances it has made in being understood and appreciated by the contemporary world. 
I may tell you at once that you will be disappointed in both these directions. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4622  
 
   Let us look through the volumes of the Internationale Zeitschrift für (ärztliche) Psychoanalyse, in which, 
since 1913, the authoritative writings in our field of work have been brought together. In the earlier volumes 
you will find a recurrent sectional heading ‘On Dream-Int erpretation’, containing numerous contributions on 
various points in the theory of dreams. But the furt her you go the rarer do these contributions become, and 
finally the sectional heading disappears completely. The analysts behave as though they had no more to 
say about dreams, as though there was nothing more to be added to the theory of dreams. But if you ask 
how much of dream-interpretation has been accepted by outsiders - by the many psychiatrists and psychotherapists who warm their pot of soup at our fire (incidentally without being very grateful for our 
hospitality), by what are described as educated people, who are in the habit of assimilating the more 
striking findings of science, by the literary men and by the public at large - the reply gives little cause for satisfaction. A few formulas have become generally familiar, among them some that we have never put 
forward - such as the thesis that all dreams are of a sexual nature - but really important things like the 
fundamental distinction between the manifest cont ent of dreams and the latent dream-thoughts, the 
realization that the wish-fulfilling function of dreams is  not contradicted by anxiety-dreams, the impossibility 
of interpreting a dream unless one has the dreamer’s associations to it at one’s disposal, and, above all, the 
discovery that what is essential in dreams is the process of the dream-work - all this still seems about as 
foreign to general awareness as it was thirty years ago. I am in a position to say this, since in the course of that period I have received innumerable letters whose writers present their dreams for interpretation or ask 
for information about the nature of dreams and who declare that they have read my Interpretation of 
Dreams , though in every sentence they betray their lack of understanding of our theory of dreams. But all 
this shall not deter us from once more giving a connected account of what we know about dreams. You will recall that last time we devoted a whole number of lectures to showing how we came to understand this 
hitherto unexplained mental phenomenon.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4623  
 
 
   Let us suppose, then, that someone - a patient in analysis, for instance - tells us one of his dreams. We 
shall assume that in this way he is making us one of the communications to which he has pledged himself by the fact of having started an analytic treatment. It is, to be sure, a communication made by inappropriate means, for dreams are not in themselves social utterances, not a means of giving information. Nor, indeed, 
do we understand what the dreamer was trying to say to us, and he himself is equally in the dark. And now 
we have to make a quick decision. On the one hand, the dream may be, as non-analytic doctors assure us, a sign that the dreamer has slept badly, that not every part of his brain has come to rest equally, that some 
areas of it, under the influence of unknown stimuli, endeavoured to go on working but were only able to do 
so in a very incomplete fashion. If that is the case, we shall be right to concern ourselves no further with the product of a nocturnal disturbance which has no psychical value: for what could we expect to derive from 
investigating it that would be of use for our purposes? Or on the other hand - but it is plain that we have 
from the first decided otherwise. We have - quite arbitrarily, it must be admitted - made the assumption, adopted as a postulate, that even this unintelligible dream must be a fully valid psychical act, with sense and worth, which we can use in analysis like any other communication. Only the outcome of our experiment 
can show whether we are right. If we succeed in turning the dream into an utterance of value of that kind, 
we shall evidently have a prospect of learning something new and of receiving communications of a sort which would otherwise be inaccessible to us. 
   Now, however, the difficulties of our task and the enigmas of our subject rise before our eyes. How do we 
propose to transform the dream into a normal communication and how do we explain the fact that some of the patient’s utterances have assumed a form that is unintelligible both to him and to us? 
   As you see, Ladies and Gentlemen, this time I am taking the path not of a genetic but of a dogmatic 
exposition. Our first step is to establish our new attitude to the problem of dreams by introducing two new 
concepts and names. What has been called the dream we shall describe as the text of the dream or the manifest dream, and what we are looking for, what we suspect, so to say, of lying behind the dream, we 
shall describe as the latent  dream-thoughts. Having done this, we can express our two tasks as follows. We 
have to transform the manifest dream into the latent one, and to explain how, in the dreamer’s mind, the 
latter has become the former. The first portion is a practical task, for which dream-interpretation is 
responsible; it calls for a technique. The second portion is a theoretical  task, whose business it is to explain 
the hypothetical dream-work; and it can only be a theory. Both of them, the technique of dream-
interpretation and the theory of the dream-work, have to be newly created. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4624  
 
   With which of the two, then, shall we start? With the technique of dream-interpretation, I think; it will 
present a more concrete appearance and make a more vivid impression on you. 
    Well then, the patient has told us a dream, which we are to interpret. We have listened passively, without putting our powers of reflection into action. What do we do next? We decide to concern ourselves as little 
as possible with what we have heard, with the manifest dream. Of course this manifest dream exhibits all 
sorts of characteristics which are not entirely a matter of indifference to us. It may be coherent, smoothly 
constructed like a literary composition, or it may be c onfused to the point of unintelligibility, almost like a 
delirium; it may contain absurd elements or jokes and apparently witty conclusions; it may seem to the dreamer clear and sharp or obscure and hazy; its pictures may exhibit the complete sensory strength of perceptions or may be shadowy like an indistinct mist; the most diverse characteristics may be present in 
the same dream, distributed over various portions of it; the dream, finally, may show an indifferent 
emotional tone or be accompanied by feelings of the strongest joy or distress. You must not suppose that 
we think nothing of this endless diversity in manifest dreams. We shall come back to it later and we shall find a great deal in it that we can make use of in our interpretations. But for the moment we will disregard it 
and follow the main road that leads to the interpretation of dreams. That is to say, we ask the dreamer, too, 
to free himself from the impression of the manifest dream, to divert his attention from the dream as a whole on to the separate portions of its content and to report to us in succession everything that occurs to him in 
relation to each of these portions - what associations present themselves to him if he focuses on each of 
them separately.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4625  
 
   That is a curious technique, is it not? - not the usual way of dealing with a communication or utterance. 
And no doubt you guess that behind this procedure there are assumptions which have not yet been 
expressly stated. But let us proceed. In what order are we to get the patient to take up the portions of his dream? There are various possibilities open to us. We can simply follow the chronological order in which they appeared in the account of the dream. That is what may be called the strictest, classical method. Or 
we can direct the dreamer to begin by looking out for the ‘day’s residues’ in the dream; for experience has 
taught us that almost every dream includes the remains of a memory or an allusion to some event (or often to several events) of the day before the dream, and, if we follow these connections, we often arrive with one 
blow at the transition from the apparently far remote dream-world to the real life of the patient. Or, again, we 
may tell him to start with those elements of the dream’s  content which strike him by their special clarity and 
sensory strength; for we know that he will find it particularly easy to get associations to these. It makes no 
difference by which of these methods we approach the associations we are in search of. 
   And next, we obtain these associations. What they bring us is of the most various kinds: memories from the day before, the ‘dream-day’, and from times long past, reflections, discussions, with arguments for and against, confessions and enquiries. Some of them the patient pours out; when he comes to others he is 
held up for a time. Most of them show a clear connection to some element of the dream; no wonder, since 
those elements were their starting-point. But it also sometimes happens that the patient introduces them with these words: ‘This seems to me to have nothing at all to do with the dream, but I tell it you because it 
occurs to me.’  
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4626  
 
   If one listens to these copious associations, one s oon notices that they have more in common with the 
content of the dream than their starting-points alone. T hey throw a surprising light on all the different parts 
of the dream, fill in gaps between them, and make their strange juxtapositions intelligible. In the end one is 
bound to become clear about the relation between them and the dream’s content. The dream is seen to be an abbreviated selection from the associations, a selection made, it is true, according to rules that we have 
not yet understood: the elements of the dream are like representatives chosen by election from a mass of 
people. There can be no doubt that by our technique we have got hold of something for which the dream is 
a substitute and in which lies the dream’s psychical value, but which no longer exhibits its puzzling 
peculiarities, its strangeness and its confusion. 
   Let there be no misunderstanding, however. The associations to the dream are not yet the latent dream-thoughts. The latter are contained in the associations like an alkali in the mother liquor, but yet not quite 
completely contained in them. On the one hand, the associations give us far more than we need for 
formulating the latent dream-thoughts - namely all the explanations, transitions, and connections which the patient’s intellect is bound to produce in the course  of his approach to the dream-thoughts. On the other 
hand, an association often comes to a stop precisely before the genuine dream-thought: it has only come 
near to it and has only had contact with it through allusions. At that point we intervene on our own; we fill in 
the hints, draw undeniable conclusions, and give explicit utterance to what the patient has only touched on in his associations. This sounds as though we allowed our ingenuity and caprice to play with the material 
put at our disposal by the dreamer and as though we misused it in order to interpret into his utterances 
what cannot be interpreted from them. Nor is it easy to show the legitimacy of our procedure in an abstract 
description of it. But you have only to carry out a dream-analysis yourselves or study a good account of one in our literature and you will be convinced of the cogent manner in which interpretative work like this 
proceeds.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4627  
 
   If in general and primarily we are dependent, in interpreting dreams, on the dreamer’s associations, yet in 
relation to certain elements of the dream’s content we adopt a quite independent attitude, chiefly because 
we have to, because as a rule associations fail to materialize in their case. We noticed at an early stage that it is always in connection with the same elements that this happens; they are not very numerous, and repeated experience has taught us that t hey are to be regarded and interpreted as symbols  of something 
else. As contrasted with the other dream-elements, a fixed meaning may be attributed to them, which, however, need not be unambiguous and whose range is determined by special rules with which we are unfamiliar. Since we know how to translate these symbols and the dreamer does not, in spite of having 
used them himself, it may happen that the sense of a dream may at once become clear to us as soon as we have heard the text of the dream, even before we have made any efforts at interpreting it, while it still remains an enigma to the dreamer himself. But I have said so much to you in my earlier lectures about 
symbolism, our knowledge of it and the problems it poses us, that I need not repeat it to-day. 
   That, then, is our method of interpreting dreams. The first and justifiable question is: ‘Can we interpret all 
dreams by its help?’ And the answer is: ‘No, not all; but so many that we feel confident in the serviceability 
and correctness of the procedure.’ ‘But why not all?’ The answer to this has something important to teach 
us, which at once introduces us into the psychical determinants of the formation of dreams: ‘Because the 
work of interpreting dreams is carried out against a resistance, which varies between trivial dimensions and 
invincibility (at least so far as the strength of our present methods reaches).’ It is impossible during our work 
to overlook the manifestations of this resistance.  At some points the associations are given without 
hesitation and the first or second idea that occurs to t he patient brings an explanation. At other points there 
is a stoppage and the patient hesitates before bringing out an association, and, if so, we often have to listen 
to a long chain of ideas before receiving anything that helps us to understand the dream. We are certainly 
right in thinking that the longer and more roundabout the chain of associations the stronger the resistance. 
We can detect the same influence at work in the forgetting of dreams. It happens often enough that a patient, despite all his efforts, cannot remember one of his dreams. But after we have been able in the 
course of a piece of analytic work to get rid of a difficulty which had been disturbing his relation to the 
analysis, the forgotten dream suddenly re-emerges. Two other observations are also in place here. It very frequently comes about that, to begin with, a portion of a dream is omitted and added afterwards as an 
addendum. This is to be regarded as an attempt to forget that portion. Experience shows that it is that 
particular piece which is the most important; there was a greater resistance, we suppose, in the path of 
communicating it than the other parts of the dream. Furthermore, we often find that a dreamer endeavours 
to prevent himself from forgetting his dreams by fixing them in writing immediately after waking up. We can 
tell him that that is no use. For the resistance from which he has extorted the preservation of the text of the dream will then be displaced on to its associations and will make the manifest dream inaccessible to 
interpretation. In view of these facts we need not feel surprised if a further increase in the resistance 
suppresses the associations altogether and thus brings the interpretation of the dream to nothing.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4628  
 
   From all this we infer that the resistance which we come across in the work of interpreting dreams must 
also have had a share in their origin. We can actually distinguish between dreams that arose under a slight 
and under a high pressure of resistance. But this pressure varies as well from place to place within one and the same dream; it is responsible for the gaps, obscurities and confusions which may interrupt the continuity of even the finest of dreams. 
   But what is creating the resistance and against what is it aimed? Well, the resistance is the surest sign to 
us of a conflict. There must be a force here which is seeking to express something and another which is striving to prevent its expression. What comes about in consequence as a manifest dream may combine all 
the decisions into which this struggle between two trends has been condensed. At one point one of these 
forces may have succeeded in putting through what it wanted to say, while at another point it is the opposing agency which has managed to blot out the intended communication completely or to replace it by 
something that reveals not a trace of it. The commonest and most characteristic cases of dream-
construction are those in which the conflict has ended in a compromise, so that the communicating agency has, it is true, been able to say what it wanted but not in the way it wanted - only in a softened down, distorted and unrecognized form. If, then, dreams do not give a faithful picture of the dream-thoughts and if 
the work of interpretation is required in order to bridge the gap between them, that is the outcome of the 
opposing, inhibiting and restricting agency which we have inferred from our perception of the resistance while we interpret dreams. So long as we studied dreams as isolated phenomena independent of the 
psychical structures akin to them, we named this agency the censor of dreams .  
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4629  
 
   You have long been aware that this censorship is not an institution peculiar to dream-life. You know that 
the conflict between the two psychical agencies, which we - inaccurately - describe as the ‘unconscious 
repressed’ and the ‘conscious’, dominates our whole mental life and that the resistance against the interpretation of dreams, the sign of the dream-censorship, is nothing other than the resistance due to repression by which the two agencies are separated. You know too that the conflict between these two 
agencies may under certain conditions produce other psychical structures which, like dreams, are the 
outcome of compromises; and you will not expect me to  repeat to you here everything that was contained in 
my introduction to the theory of the neuroses in order to demonstrate to you what we know of the 
determinants of the formation of such compromises. You have realized that the dream is a pathological 
product, the first member of the class which includes hysterical symptoms, obsessions and delusions, but that it is distinguished from the others by its trans itoriness and by its occurrence under conditions which are 
part of normal life. For let us bear firmly in mind that, as was already pointed out by Aristotle, dream life is the way in which our mind works during the state of sleep. The state of sleep involves a turning-away from the real external world, and there we have the nece ssary condition for the development of a psychosis. The 
most careful study of the severe psychoses will not reveal to us a single feature that is more characteristic 
of those pathological conditions. In psychoses, however, the turning-away from reality is brought about in 
two kinds of way: either by the unconscious repressed becoming excessively strong so that it overwhelms 
the conscious, which is attached to reality, or because reality has become so intolerably distressing that the 
threatened ego throws itself into the arms of the unconscious instinctual forces in a desperate revolt. The 
harmless dream-psychosis is the result of a withdrawal from the external world which is consciously willed and only temporary, and it disappears when relations to the external world are resumed. During the 
isolation of the sleeping individual an alteration in the distribution of his psychical energy also sets in; a part 
of the expenditure on repression, which is normally required in order to hold the unconscious down, can be saved, for if the unconscious makes use of its relative liberation for active purposes, it finds its path to motility closed and the only path open to it is the harmless one leading to hallucinatory satisfaction. Now, 
therefore, a dream can be formed; but the fact of the dream-censorship shows that even during sleep 
enough of the resistance due to repression is retained.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4630  
 
   Here we are presented with a means of answering the question of whether dreams have a function too, 
whether they are entrusted with any useful achievemen t. The condition of rest free from stimulus, which the 
state of sleep wishes to establish, is threatened from three directions: in a relatively accidental manner by 
external stimuli during sleep, and by interests of the previous day which cannot be broken off, and in an 
unavoidable manner by unsated repressed instinctual impulses which are on the watch for an opportunity of 
finding expression. In consequence of the diminishing of repressions at night there would be a risk that the 
rest afforded by sleep would be interrupted whenever an instigation from outside or from inside succeeded in linking up with an unconscious instinctual source. The process of dreaming allows the product of a 
collaboration of this kind to find an outlet in a harmless hallucinatory experience and in that way assures a 
continuation of sleep. The fact that a dream occasionally awakens the sleeper, to the accompaniment of a generation of anxiety, is no contradiction of this f unction but rather, perhaps, a signal that the watchman 
regards the situation as too dangerous and no longer feels able to control it. And very often then, while we are still asleep, a consolation occurs to us which seeks to prevent our waking up: ‘But after all it’s only a dream!’    This was what I wanted to say to you, Ladies and Gentlemen, about dream-interpretation, whose task it is 
to lead the way from the manifest dream to the latent dream-thoughts. When this has been achieved, interest in a dream, so far as practical analysis is concerned, is for the most part at an end. We add the communication we have received in the form of a dream to the rest of the patient’s communications and 
proceed with the analysis. We, however, have an interest in dwelling a little longer on the dream. We are 
tempted to study the process by which the latent dream-thoughts were transformed into the manifest dream. We call this the ‘dream-work’. As you will recall, I described it in such detail in my earlier lectures 
that I can restrict my present survey to the most concise summary. 
    The process of the dream-work, then, is something entirely new and strange, nothing resembling which was known before. It has given us our first glimpse of the processes which take place in the unconscious 
system and has shown us that they are quite other than what we know from our conscious thinking and are 
bound to appear to the latter preposterous and incorrect. The importance of this finding was then increased by the discovery that in the construction of neurotic  symptoms the same mechanisms (we do not venture to 
say ‘processes of thought’) are operative as those which have transformed the latent dream-thoughts into 
the manifest dream.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4631  
 
   In what follows I shall not be able to avoid a schem atic method of exposition. Let us assume that in a 
particular case we have before us all the latent thoughts, charged with a greater or less amount of affect, by 
which the manifest dream has been replaced after its interpretation has been completed. We shall then be struck by one difference among these latent thoughts, and that difference will take us a long way. Almost all these dream-thoughts are recognized by the dreamer or acknowledged by him; he admits that he has 
thought this, now or at some other time, or that he might have thought it. There is only one single thought 
that he refuses to accept; it is strange to him or even perhaps repellent; he may possibly reject it with passionate feeling. It now becomes evident to us that  the other thoughts are portions of a conscious, or, 
more accurately, a preconscious train of thinking. They might have been thought in waking life too, and indeed they were probably formed during the previous day. This one repudiated thought, however, or, properly speaking, this one impulse, is a child of night; it belongs to the dreamer’s unconscious and on that 
account it is repudiated and rejected by him. It had to wait for the nightly relaxation of repression in order to 
arrive at any kind of expression. And in any case this expression is a weakened, distorted and disguised one; without our work of dream-interpretation we should not have found it. This unconscious impulse has to thank its link with the other, unobjectionable, dream-thoughts for the opportunity of slipping past the barrier 
of the censorship in an inconspicuous disguise. On the other hand, the preconscious dream-thoughts have 
to thank this same link for the power to occupy mental life during sleep as well. For there is no doubt about it: this unconscious impulse is the true creator of the dream; it is what produces the psychical energy for the 
dream’s construction. Like any other instinctual impulse, it cannot strive for anything other than its own 
satisfaction; and our experience in interpreting dreams shows us too that that is the sense of all dreaming. In every dream an instinctual wish has to be represented as fulfilled. The shutting-off of mental life from 
reality at night and the regression to primitive mechanisms which this makes possible enable this wished-
for instinctual satisfaction to be experienced in a hallucinatory manner as occurring in the present. As a result of this same regression, ideas are transformed in the dream into visual pictures: the latent dream-thoughts, that is to say, are dramatized and illustrated. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4632  
 
   This piece of the dream-work gives us information about some of the most striking and peculiar features 
of dreams. I will repeat the course of events in dream-formation. As an introduction: the wish to sleep and 
intentional turning away from the external world. Next, two consequences of this for the mental apparatus: 
first, the possibility for older and more primitive methods of working to emerge in it - regression; secondly, the lowering of the resistance due to repression which weighs down upon the unconscious. As a result of 
this last factor the possibility arises for the form ation of a dream and this is taken advantage of by the 
precipitating causes, the internal and external stimuli which have become active. The dream which 
originates in this way is already a compromise-structure. It has a double function; on the one hand it is ego-syntonic, since, by getting rid of the stimuli which are interfering with sleep, it serves the wish to sleep; on 
the other hand it allows a repressed instinctual impulse to obtain the satisfaction that is possible in these circumstances, in the form of the hallucinated fulfilment of a wish. The whole process of forming a dream 
which is permitted by the sleeping ego is, however, subject to the condition of the censorship, which is 
exercised by the residue of the repression still in operati on. I cannot present the process more simply: it is 
not more simple. But I can proceed now with my description of the dream-work.    Let us go back once more to the latent dream-thoughts. Their most powerful element is the repressed 
instinctual impulse which has created in them an expr ession for itself on the basis of the presence of 
chance stimuli and by transference on to the day’s residues - though an expression that is toned down and 
disguised. Like every instinctual impulse, it too presses for satisfaction by action; but its path to motility is blocked by the physiological regulations implied in the state of sleep; it is compelled to take the backwards 
course in the direction of perception and to be content with a hallucinated satisfaction. The latent dream-thoughts are thus transformed into a collection of sensory images and visual scenes. It is as they travel on 
this course that what seems to us so novel and so strange occurs to them. All the linguistic instruments by 
which we express the subtler relations of thought - the conjunctions and prepositions, the changes in declension and conjugation - are dropped, because there ar e no means of representing them; just as in a 
primitive language without any grammar, only the raw material of thought is expressed and abstract terms 
are taken back to the concrete ones that are at their basis. What is left over after this may well appear 
disconnected. The copious employment of symbols, which have become alien to conscious thinking, for representing certain objects and processes is in harmony alike with the archaic regression in the mental 
apparatus and with the demands of the censorship. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4633  
 
   But other changes made in the elements of the dream-thoughts go far beyond this. Such of those 
elements as allow any point of contact to be found between them are condensed  into new unities. In the 
process of transforming the thoughts into pictures, preference is unmistakably given to such as permit of 
this putting-together, this condensation; it is as t hough a force were at work which was subjecting the 
material to compression and concentration. As a result of condensation, one element in the manifest dream 
may correspond to numerous elements in the latent dream-thoughts; but, conversely too, one element in 
the dream-thoughts may be represented by several images in the dream.    Still more remarkable is the other process - displacement  or shifting of accent - which in conscious 
thinking we come across only as faulty reasoning or as means for a joke. The different ideas in the dream-thoughts are, indeed, not all of equal value; they are ca thected with quotas of affect of varying magnitude 
and are correspondingly judged to be important and deserving of interest to a greater or less degree. In the 
dream-work these ideas are separated from the affects attaching to them. The affects are dealt with 
independently; they may be displaced on to something else, they may be retained, they may undergo alterations, or they may not appear in the dream at all. The importance of the ideas that have been stripped 
of their affect returns in the dream as sensory strength in the dream-pictures; but we observe that this 
accent has passed over from important elements to indifferent ones. Thus something that played only a 
minor part in the dream-thoughts seems to be pushed into the foreground in the dream as the main thing, while, on the contrary, what was the essence of the dream-thoughts finds only passing and indistinct 
representation in the dream. No other part of the dream-work is so much responsible for making the dream 
strange and incomprehensible to the dreamer. Displacement is the principal means used in the dream-
distortion  to which the dream-thoughts must submit under the influence of the censorship. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4634  
 
   After these influences have been brought to bear upon the dream-thoughts the dream is almost complete. 
A further, somewhat variable, factor also comes into play - known as ‘secondary revision’ - after the dream 
has been presented before consciousness as an object of percept ion. At that point we treat it as we are in 
general accustomed to treat the contents of our per ception: we fill in gaps and introduce connections, and 
in doing so are often guilty of gross misunderstandings. But this activity, which might be described as a 
rationalizing one and which at best provides the dream wi th a smooth façade that cannot fit its true content, 
may also be omitted or only be expressed to a very modest degree - in which case the dream will display all 
its rents and cracks openly. It must not be forgotten, on the other hand, that the dream-work does not 
always operate with equal energy either; it often restricts itself to certain portions of the dream-thoughts 
only and others of them are allowed to appear in the dream unaltered. In such cases an impression is given of the dream having carried out the most delicate and complex intellectual operations, of its having 
speculated, made jokes, arrived at decisions and solved problems, whereas all this is a product of our 
normal mental activity, may have been performed equally well during the day before the dream as during the night, has nothing to do with the dream-work and brings nothing to light that is characteristic of dreams. Nor is it superfluous to insist once more on the c ontrast within the dream-thoughts themselves between the 
unconscious instinctual impulse and the day’s residues. While the latter exhibit all the multiplicity of our mental acts, the former, which becomes the motive force proper of the forming of the dream, finds its outlet invariably in the fulfilment of a wish. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis 4635  
 
 
   I could have told you all this fifteen years ago, and indeed I believe I did in fact tell it you then. And now 
let me bring together such changes and new discoveries as may have been made during the interval. I have said already that I am afraid you will find that it amounts to very little, and you will fail to understand why I obliged you to listen to the same thing twice over, and obliged myself to say it. But fifteen years have 
passed meanwhile and I hope that this will be my easiest way of re-establishing contact with you. 
Moreover, these are such fundamental things, of such decisive importance for understanding psycho-analysis, that one may be glad to hear them a second time, and it is in itself worth knowing that they have 
remained so much the same for fifteen years. 
   In the literature of this period you will of course find a large quantity of confirmatory material and of presentation of details, of which I intend only to give you samples. I shall also, incidentally, be able to tell 
you a few things that were in fact already known earlie r. What is in question is principally the symbolism in 
dreams and the other methods of representation in them. Now listen to this. Only quite a short while ago 
the medical faculty in an American University refused to allow psycho-analysis the status of a science, on the ground that it did not admit of any experimental proof. They might have raised the same objection to 
astronomy; indeed, experimentation with the heavenly bodies is particularly difficult. There one has to fall 
back on observation. Nevertheless, some Viennese investigators have actually made a beginning with experimental confirmation of our dream symbolism. As long ago as in 1912 a Dr. Schrötter found that if 
instructions to dream of sexual matters are given to deeply hypnotized subjects, then in the dream that is 
thus provoked the sexual material emerges with its place taken by the symbols that are familiar to us. For 
instance, a woman was told to dream of sexual intercourse with a female friend. In her dream this friend 
appeared with a travelling-bag on which was pasted the label ‘Ladies Only’. Still more impressive 
experiments were carried out by Betlheim and Hartmann in 1924. They worked with patients suffering from what is known as the Korsakoff confusional psychosis. They told these patients stories of a grossly sexual kind and observed the distortions which appeared when t he patients were instructed to reproduce what 
they had been told. Once more there emerged the symbols for sexual organs and sexual intercourse that are familiar to us - among them the symbol of the stairc ase which, as the writers justly remark, could never 
have been reached by a conscious wish to distort. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4636  
 
   In a very interesting series of experiments, Herbert Silberer has shown that one can catch the dream-
work red-handed, as it were, in the act of turning abstract thoughts into visual pictures. If he tried to force 
himself to do intellectual work while he was in a state of fatigue and drowsiness, the thought would often vanish and be replaced by a vision, which was obviously a substitute for it.    Here is a simple example. ‘I thought’, says Silberer, ‘of having to revise an uneven passage in an essay.’ 
The vision: ‘I saw myself planing a piece of w ood.’ It often happened during these experiments that the 
content of the vision was not the thought that was being dealt with but his own subjective state while he 
was making the effort - the state instead of the object. This is described by Silberer as a ‘functional 
phenomenon’. An example will show you at once what is meant. The author was endeavouring to compare 
the opinions of two philosophers on a particular question. But in his sleepy condition one of these opinions kept on escaping him and finally he had a vision that he was asking for information from a disobliging 
secretary who was bent over his writing-table and who began by disregarding him and then gave him a 
disagreeable and uncomplying look. The conditions under which the experiments were made probably themselves explain why the vision that was induced represented so often an event of self-observation. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4637  
 
   We have not yet finished with symbols. There are some which we believed we recognized but which 
nevertheless worried us because we could not explain how this  particular symbol had come to have that 
particular meaning. In such cases confirmations from elsewhere - from philology, folklore, mythology or 
ritual - were bound to be especially welcome. An instance of this sort is the symbol of an overcoat or cloak. We have said that in a woman’s dreams this stands for a man. I hope it will impress you when you hear that 
Theodor Reik (1920) gives us this information: ‘During the extremely ancient bridal ceremonial of the 
Bedouins, the bridegroom covers the bride with a special cloak known as "Aba" and speaks the following ritual words: "Henceforth none save I shall cover thee!" (Quoted from Robert Eisler). We have also found 
several fresh symbols, at least two of which I will tell you of. According to Abraham (1922) a spider in 
dreams is a symbol of the mother, but of the phallic  mother, of whom we are afraid; so that the fear of 
spiders expresses dread of mother-incest and horror of the female genitals. You know, perhaps, that the 
mythological creation, Medusa’s head, can be traced back to the same motif  of fright at castration. The 
other symbol I want to talk to you about is that of the bridge , which has been explained by Ferenczi (1921 
and 1922). First it means the male organ, which unites the two parents in sexual intercourse; but afterwards 
it develops further meanings which are derived from this first one. In so far as it is thanks to the male organ 
that we are able to come into the world at all, out of the amniotic fluid, a bridge becomes the crossing from 
the other world (the unborn state, the womb) to this world (life); and, since men also picture death as a return to the womb (to the water), a bridge also acquires the meaning of something that leads to death, and 
finally, at a further remove from its original sense, it stands for transitions or changes in condition generally. 
It tallies with this, accordingly, if a woman who has not overcome her wish to be a man has frequent dreams of bridges that are too short to reach the further shore. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4638  
 
   In the manifest content of dreams we very often find pictures and situations recalling familiar themes in 
fairy tales, legends and myths. The interpretation of such dreams thus throws a light on the original 
interests which created these themes, though we must at the same time not forget, of course, the change in meaning by which this material has been affected in the course of time. Our work of interpretation uncovers, so to say, the raw material, which must often enough be described as sexual in the widest sense, 
but has found the most varied application in later adaptations. Derivations of this kind are apt to bring down 
on us the wrath of all non-analytically schooled worker s, as though we were seeking to deny or undervalue 
everything that was later erected on the original basis. Nevertheless, such discoveries are instructive and 
interesting. The same is true of tracing back the origin of particular themes in plastic art, as, for instance, 
when M. J. Eisler (1919), following indications in his patients’ dreams, gave an analytic interpretation of the youth playing with a little boy represented in the Hermes of Praxiteles. And lastly I cannot resist pointing out 
how often light is thrown by the interpretation of dreams on mythological themes in particular. Thus, for instance, the legend of the Labyrinth can be recognized as  a representation of anal birth: the twisting paths 
are the bowels and Ariadne’s thread is the umbilical cord.    The methods of representation employed by the dream-work - fascinating material, scarcely capable of 
exhaustion - have been made more and more familiar to us by closer study. I will give you a few examples 
of them. Thus, for instance, dreams represent the rela tion of frequency by a multiplication of similar things. 
Here is a young girl’s remarkable dream. She dreamt she came into a great hall and found some one in it 
sitting on a chair; this was repeated six or eight times or more, but each time it was her father. This is easy 
to understand when we discover, from accessory details in the interpretation, that this room stood for the womb. The dream then becomes equivalent to the phantasy, familiarly found in girls, of having met their 
rather already during their intra-uterine life when he visited the womb while their mother was pregnant. You 
should not be confused by the fact that something is reversed in the dream - that her father’s ‘coming-in’ is displaced on to herself; incidentally, this has a special meaning of its own as well. The multiplication of the 
figure of the father can only express the fact that the event in question occurred repeatedly. After all, it must 
be allowed that the dream is not taking very much on itself in expressing frequency by multiplicity. It has 
only needed to go back to the original significance of the former word; to-day it means to us a repetition in time, but it is derived from an accumulation in space. In general, indeed, where it is possible, the dream-
work changes temporal relations into spatial ones and represents them as such. In a dream, for instance, 
one may see a scene between two people who look very small and a long way off, as though one were seeing them through the wrong end of a pair of opera-glasses. Here, both the smallness and the 
remoteness in space have the same significance: what is meant is remoteness in time and we are to 
understand that the scene is from the remote past. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4639  
 
   Again, you may remember that in my earlier lectures I already told you (and illustrated the fact by 
examples) that we had learnt to make use for our interpretations even of the purely formal  features of the 
manifest dream - that is, to transform them into material coming from the latent dream-thoughts. As you 
already know, all dreams that are dreamt in a single night belong in a single context. But it is not a matter of indifference whether these dreams appear to the dreamer as a continuum or whether he divides them into 
several parts and into how many. The number of such parts often corresponds to an equal number of 
separate focal points in the structural formation of the latent dream-thoughts or to contending trends in the 
dreamer’s mental life, each of which finds a dominant, even though never an exclusive, expression in one 
particular part of the dream. A short introductory dream and a longer main dream following it often stand in 
the relation of protasis and apodosis, of which a very clear instance will be found in the old lectures. A dream which is described by the dreamer as ‘somehow interpolated’ will actually correspond to a 
dependent clause in the dream-thoughts. Franz Alexander (1925) has shown in a study on pairs of dreams 
that it not infrequently happens that two dreams in one ni ght share the carrying-out of the dream’s task by 
producing a wish-fulfilment in two stages if they are taken together, though each dream separately would 
not effect that result. Suppose, for instance, that the dream-wish had as its content some illicit action in 
regard to a particular person. Then in the first dream  the person will appear undisguised, but the action will 
be only timidly hinted at. The second dream will behave differently. The action will be named without disguise, but the person will either be made unrecognizable or replaced by someone indifferent. This, you 
will admit, gives one an impression of actual cunning. Another and similar relation between the two 
members of a pair of dreams is found where one represents a punishment and the other the sinful wish-fulfilment. It amounts to this: ‘if one accepts the punishment for it, one can go on to allow oneself the 
forbidden thing.’  
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4640  
 
 
   I cannot detain you any longer over such minor discoveries or over the discussions relating to the 
employment of dream-interpretation in the work of analysis. I feel sure you are impatient to hear what 
changes have been made in our fundamental views on the nature and significance of dreams. I have already warned you that precisely on this there is little to report to you. The most disputed point in the whole 
theory was no doubt the assertion that all dreams are the fulfilments of wishes. The inevitable and ever recurring objection raised by the layman that there are nevertheless so many anxiety-dreams was, I think I may say, completely disposed of in my earlier lectures. With the division into wishful dreams, anxiety-
dreams and punishment dreams, we have kept our theory intact. 
   Punishment-dreams, too, are fulfilments of wishes, though not of wishes of the instinctual impulses but of those of the critical, censoring and punishing agency in the mind. If we have a pure punishment-dream 
before us, an easy mental operation will enable us to restore the wishful dream to which the punishment-
dream was the correct rejoinder and which, owing to this repudiation, was replaced as the manifest dream. As you know, Ladies and Gentlemen, the study of dreams was what first helped us to understand the neuroses, and you will find it natural that our knowledge of the neuroses was later able to influence our 
view of dreams. As you will hear, we have been obliged to  postulate the existence in the mind of a special 
critical and prohibiting agency which we have named the ‘super-ego’. Since recognizing that the censorship 
of dreams is also a function of this agency, we have been led to examine the part played by the super-ego in the construction of dreams more carefully. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4641  
 
   Only two serious difficulties have arisen against the wish-fulfilment theory of dreams. A discussion of 
them leads far afield and has not yet, indeed, brought us to any wholly satisfying conclusion. 
   The first of these difficulties is presented in the fact that people who have experienced a shock, a severe psychical trauma - such as happened so often during the war and such as affords the basis for traumatic hysteria - are regularly taken back in their dreams into the traumatic situation. According to our hypotheses 
about the function of dreams this should not occur. What wishful impulse could be satisfied by harking back 
in this way to this exceedingly distressing traumatic experience? It is hard to guess.    We meet with the second of these facts almost every day in the course of our analytic work; and it does 
not imply such an important objection as the other does. One of the tasks of psycho-analysis, as you know, 
is to lift the veil of amnesia which hides the earliest years of childhood and to bring to conscious memory the manifestations of early infantile sexual life which are contained in them. Now these first sexual 
experiences of a child are linked to painful impressions of anxiety, prohibition, disappointment and punishment. We can understand their having been repressed; but, that being so, we cannot understand how it is that they have such free access to dream-life, that they provide the pattern for so many dream-phantasies and that dreams are filled with reproductions of these scenes from childhood and with allusions 
to them. It must be admitted that their unpleasurable character and the dream-work’s wish-fulfilling purpose 
seem far from mutually compatible. But it may be that in  this case we are magnifying the difficulty. After all, 
these same infantile experiences have attached to them all the imperishable, unfulfilled instinctual wishes 
which throughout life provide the energy for the construction of dreams, and to which we may no doubt 
credit the possibility, in their mighty uprush, of forcing to the surface, along with the rest, the material of distressing events. And on the other hand the manner and form in which this material is reproduced shows 
unmistakably the efforts of the dream-work directed to denying the unpleasure by means of distortion and 
to transforming disappointment into attainment.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4642  
 
   With the traumatic neuroses things are different. In their case the dreams regularly end in the generation 
of anxiety. We should not, I think, be afraid to admit t hat here the function of the dream has failed. I will not 
invoke the saying that the exception proves the rule: its wisdom seems to me most questionable. But no 
doubt the exception does not overturn the rule. If, for the sake of studying it, we isolate one particular psychical function, such as dreaming, from the psychical machinery as a whole, we make it possible to 
discover the laws that are peculiar to it; but when we insert it once more into the general context we must 
be prepared to discover that these findings are obscured or impaired by collision with other forces. We say that a dream is the fulfilment of a wish; but if you w ant to take these latter objections into account, you can 
say nevertheless that a dream is an attempt  at the fulfilment of a wish. No one who can properly appreciate 
the dynamics of the mind will suppose that you have said anything different by this. In certain circumstances a dream is only able to put its intention into effect very incompletely, or must abandon it 
entirely. Unconscious fixation to a trauma seems to be foremost among these obstacles to the function of 
dreaming. While the sleeper is obliged to dream, because the relaxation of repression at night allows the upward pressure of the traumatic fixation to become active, there is a failure in the functioning of his dream-work, which would like to transform the memory-traces of the traumatic event into the fulfilment of a wish. In 
these circumstances it will happen that one cannot sleep, that one gives up sleep from dread of the failure of the function of dreaming. Traumatic neuroses are here offering us an extreme case; but we must admit that childhood experiences, too, are of a traumatic nature, and we need not be surprised if comparatively 
trivial interferences with the function of dreams may arise under other conditions as well.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4643  
 
LECTURE XXX 
 
DREAMS AND OCCULTISM 
 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN , - To-day we will proceed along a narrow path, but one which may lead us to a 
wide prospect. 
   You will scarcely be surprised by the news that I am going to speak to you on the relation of dreams to occultism. Dreams have, indeed, often been regarded as the gateway into the world of mysticism, and even 
to-day are themselves looked on by many peopl e as an occult phenomenon. Even we, who have made 
them into a subject for scientific study, do not dispute that one or more threads link them to those obscure 
matters. Mysticism, occultism - what is meant by these words? You must not expect me to make any 
attempt at embracing this ill-circumscribed region with definitions. We all know in a general and indefinite manner what the words imply to us. They refer to some sort of ‘other world’, lying beyond the bright world governed by relentless laws which has been constructed for us by science.    Occultism asserts that there are in fact ‘more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in our 
philosophy’. Well, we need not feel bound by the narrow-mindedness of academic philosophy; we are ready 
to believe what is shown to us to deserve belief.    We propose to proceed with these things as we do with any other scientific material: first of all to establish 
whether such events can really be shown to occur, and then and only then, when their factual nature 
cannot be doubted, to concern ourselves with their explanation. It cannot be denied, however, that even the putting of this decision into action is made hard for us by intellectual, psychological and historical factors. 
The case is not the same as when we approach other investigations. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4644  
 
   First, the intellectual difficulty. Let me give you a crude and obvious explanation of what I have in mind. 
Let us suppose that the question at issue is the constitution of the interior of the earth. We have, as you are 
aware, no certain knowledge about it. We suspect that it  consists of heavy metals in an incandescent state. 
Then let us imagine that someone puts forward an assertion that the interior of the earth consists of water 
saturated with carbonic acid - that is to say, with a kind of soda-water. We shall no doubt say that this is 
most improbable, that it contradicts all our expecta tions and pays no attention to the known facts which 
have led us to adopt the metal hypothesis. Nevertheless it is not inconceivable; if someone were to show us 
a way of testing the soda-water hypothesis we should follow it without objecting. But suppose now that 
someone else comes along and seriously asserts that the core of the earth consists of jam. Our reaction to 
this will be quite different. We shall tell ourselves that jam does not occur in nature, that it is a product of human cooking, that, moreover, the existence of this material presupposes the presence of fruit-trees and 
their fruit, and that we cannot see how we can locate  vegetation and human cookery in the interior of the 
earth. The result of these intellectual objections will be a switching of our interest: instead of starting upon 
an investigation of whether the core of the earth really consists of jam, we shall ask ourselves what sort of 
person this must be who can arrive at such a notion, or at most we shall ask him where he got it from. The 
unlucky inventor of the jam theory will be very much insulted and will complain that we are refusing to make 
an objective investigation of his assertion on the ground of a pretendedly scientific prejudice. But this will be of no help to him. We perceive that prejudices are not always to be reprobated, but that they are sometimes 
justified and expedient because they save us useless labour. In fact they are only conclusions based on an 
analogy with other well-founded judgements.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4645  
 
   A whole number of occultist assertions have the same  sort of effect on us as the jam hypothesis; so that 
we consider ourselves justified in rejecting them at sight, without further investigation. But all the same, the 
position is not so simple. A comparison like the one I have chosen proves nothing, or proves as little as 
comparisons in general. It remains doubtful whether it fits the case, and it is clear that its choice was already determined by our attitude of contemptuous rejection. Prejudices are sometimes expedient and 
justified; but sometimes they are erroneous and detrimental, and one can never tell when they are the one 
and when the other. The history of science itself abounds in instances which are a warning against premature condemnation. For a long time it was regarded as a senseless hypothesis to suppose that the 
stones, which we now call meteorites, could have reached the earth from outer space or that the rocks 
forming mountains, in which the remains of she lls are imbedded, could have once formed the bed of the 
sea. Incidentally, much the same thing happened to our psycho-analysis when it brought forward its 
inference of there being an unconscious. Thus we analysts have special reason to be careful in using 
intellectual considerations for rejecting new hypotheses  and must admit that they do not relieve us from 
feelings of antipathy, doubt and uncertainty.    I have spoken of the second factor as the p sychological one. By that I mean the general tendency of 
mankind to credulity and a belief in the miraculous. From the very beginning, when life takes us under its strict discipline, a resistance stirs within us agains t the relentlessness and monotony of the laws of thought 
and against the demands of reality-testing. Reason becomes the enemy which withholds from us so many 
possibilities of pleasure. We discover how much pleasure it gives us to withdraw from it, temporarily at 
least, and to surrender to the allurements of nonsense. Schoolboys delight in the twisting of words; when a scientific congress is over, the specialists make f un of their own activities; even earnest-minded men enjoy 
a joke. More serious hostility to ‘Reason and Science,  the highest strength possessed by man’, awaits its 
opportunity; it hastens to prefer the miracle-doctor or the practitioner of nature-cures to the ‘qualified’ physician; it is favourable to the assertions of occultism so long as those alleged facts can be taken as breaches of laws and rules; it lulls criticism to sleep, falsifies perceptions and enforces confirmations and 
agreements which cannot be justified. If this human tendency is taken into account, there is every reason to 
discount much of the information put forward in occultist literature. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4646  
 
   I have called the third doubt the historical one; and by it I mean to point out that there is in fact nothing 
new in the world of occultism. There emerge in it once more all the signs, miracles, prophecies and 
apparitions which have been reported to us from anci ent times and in ancient books and which we thought 
had long since been disposed of as the offspring of unbr idled imagination or of tendentious fraud, as the 
product of an age in which man’s ignorance was very great and the scientific spirit was still in its cradle. If 
we accept the truth of what, according to the occultists’ information, still occurs to-day, we must also believe 
in the authenticity of the reports which have come down to us from ancient times. And we must then reflect that the tradition and sacred books of all peoples are brimful of similar marvellous tales and that the 
religions base their claim to credibility on precisely such miraculous events and find proof in them of the 
operation of superhuman powers. That being so, it will be hard for us to avoid a suspicion that the interest in occultism is in fact a religious one and that one of the secret motives of the occultist movement is to 
come to the help of religion, threatened as it is by the advance of scientific thought. And with the discovery 
of this motive our distrust must increase and our disinclination to embark on the examination of these 
supposedly occult phenomena.    Sooner or later, however, this disinclination must be overcome. We are faced by a question of fact: is 
what the occultists tell us true or not? It must, after all, be possible to decide this by observation. At bottom 
we have cause for gratitude to the occultists. The miraculous stories from ancient times are beyond the reach of our testing. If in our opinion they cannot be subs tantiated, we must admit that they cannot, strictly 
speaking, be disproved. But about contemporary happenings, at which we are able to be present, it must be possible for us to reach a definite judgement. If we arrive at a conviction that such miracles do not occur to-day, we need not fear the counter-argument that they may nevertheless have taken place in ancient 
times: in that case other explanations will be much more plausible. Thus we have settled our doubts and are ready to take part in an investigation of occult phenomena.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4647  
 
   But here unluckily we are met by circumstances which are exceedingly unfavourable to our honest 
intentions. The observations on which our judgement  is supposed to depend take place under conditions 
which make our sensory perceptions uncertain and which blunt our power of attention; they occur in 
darkness or in dimmed light after long periods of blank expectation. We are told that in fact our unbelieving - that is to say, critical - attitude may prevent the expected phenomena from happening. The situation thus 
brought about is nothing less than a caricature of the circumstances in which we are usually accustomed to 
carry out scientific enquiries. The observations are made upon what are called ‘mediums’ - individuals to whom peculiarly ‘sensitive’ faculties are ascribed,  but who are by no means distinguished by outstanding 
qualities of intellect or character and who are not, like the miracle-workers of the past, inspired by any great idea or serious purpose. On the contrary, they are l ooked upon, even by those who believe in their secret 
powers, as particularly untrustworthy; most of them have already been detected as cheats and we may 
reasonably expect that the same fate awaits the remainder. Their performances give one the impression of children’s mischievous pranks or of conjuring tricks. Never has anything of importance yet emerged from séances  with these mediums - the revelation of a new source of power, for instance. We do not, it is true, 
expect to receive hints on pigeon-breeding from the conjurer who produces pigeons by magic from his 
empty top-hat. I can easily put myself in the place of a person who tries to fulfil the demands of an objective 
attitude and so takes part in occult séances , but who grows tired after a while and turns away in disgust 
from what is expected of him and goes back unenlightened to his former prejudices. The reproach may be made against such a person that this is not the right way of behaving: that one ought not to lay down in 
advance what the phenomena one is seeking to study sha ll be like and in what circumstances they shall 
appear. One should, on the contrary, persevere, and give weight to the precautionary and supervisory 
measures by which efforts have recently been made to provide against the untrustworthiness of mediums. 
Unfortunately this modern protective technique makes an end of the easy accessibility of occult observations. The study of occultism becomes a specialized and difficult profession - an activity one cannot pursue alongside of one’s other interests. And until t hose concerned in these investigations have reached 
their conclusions, we are left to our doubts and our own conjectures.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4648  
 
   Of these conjectures no doubt the most probable is that there is a real core of yet unrecognized facts in 
occultism round which cheating and phantasy have spun a veil which it is hard to pierce. But how can we 
even approach this core? at what point can we attack the problem? It is here, I think, that dreams come to our help, by giving us a hint that from out of this chaos we should pick the subject of telepathy . 
 
   What we call ‘telepathy’ is, as you know, the alleged fact that an event which occurs at a particular time 
comes at about the same moment to the consciousness of someone distant in space, without the paths of 
communication that are familiar to us coming into ques tion. It is implicitly presupposed that this event 
concerns a person in whom the other one (the receiver of the intelligence) has a strong emotional interest. For instance, Person A may be the victim of an accident or may die, and Person B, someone nearly attached to him - his mother or daughter or fiancée - learns the fact at about the same time through a visual 
or auditory perception. In this latter case, then, it is as if she had been informed by telephone, though such 
was not the case; it is a kind of psychical counterpart to wireless telegraphy. I need not insist to you on the improbability of such events, and there is good reason for dismissing the majority of such reports. A few are left over which cannot be so easily disposed of in this way. Permit me now, for the purpose of what I have 
to tell you, to omit the cautious little word ‘alleged’ and to proceed as though I believed in the objective 
reality of the phenomenon of telepathy. But bear firmly in  mind that that is not the case and that I have 
committed myself to no conviction. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4649  
 
   Actually I have little to tell you - only a modest fact. I will also at once reduce your expectations still further 
by saying that at bottom dreams have little to do with telepathy. Telepathy does not throw any fresh light on 
the nature of dreams nor do dreams give any direct evidence of the reality of telepathy. Moreover the phenomenon of telepathy is by no means bound up with dreams; it can occur as well during the waking state. The only reason for discussing the relation betw een dreams and telepathy is that the state of sleep 
seems particularly suited for receiving telepathic messages. In such cases one has what is called a telepathic dream and, when it is analysed, one forms a conviction that the telepathic news has played the same part as any other portion of the day’s residues  and that it has been changed in the same way by the 
dream-work and made to serve its purpose.    During the analysis of one such telepathic dream, something occurred which seems to me of sufficient interest in spite of its triviality to serve as the starting-point of this lecture. When in 1922 I gave my first 
account of this matter I had only a single observation at my disposal. Since then I have made a number of 
similar ones, but I will keep to the first example, because it is easiest to describe, and I will take you straight away in medias res . 
 
   An obviously intelligent man, who from his own account was not in the least ‘inclined towards occultism’, 
wrote to me about a dream he had had which seemed to him remarkable. He began by informing me that his married daughter, who lived at a distance from him, was expecting her first confinement in the middle of 
December. This daughter meant a great deal to him and he knew too that she was very much attached to 
him. During the night of November 16-17, then, he dreamt that his wife had given birth to twins. A number of details followed, which I may here pass over, and all of which were never in fact explained. The wife who 
in the dream had become the mother of twins was his second wife, his daughter’s stepmother. He did not 
wish to have a child by his present wife who, he said, had no aptitude for bringing up children sensibly; 
moreover, at the time of the dream he had long ceased to have sexual relations with her. What led him to write to me was not doubt about the theory of dreams,  though the manifest content of his dream would 
have justified it, for why did the dream, in complete contradiction to his wishes, make his wife give birth to children? Nor, according to him, was there any reason to fear that this unwished-for event might occur. What induced him to report this dream to me was the circumstance that on the morning of November 18 he 
received a telegram announcing that his daughter had given birth to twins. The telegram had been handed 
in the day before and the birth had taken place during t he night of November 16-17, at about the same time 
at which he had had the dream of his wife’s twin birth. The dreamer asked me whether I thought the 
coincidence between dream and event was accidental. He did not venture to call the dream a telepathic 
one, since the difference between its content and the event affected precisely what seemed to him essential in it - the identity of the person who gave bi rth to the children. But one of his comments shows that 
he would not have been astonished at an actual te lepathic dream: he believed his daughter would have 
thought particularly of him during her labour.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4650  
 
   I feel sure, Ladies and Gentlemen, that you have been able to explain this dream already and understand 
too why I have told it you. Here was a man who was dissatisfied with his second wife and who would prefer 
his wife to be like the daughter of his first marriage. This ‘like’ dropped out, of course, so far as the unconscious was concerned. And now the telepathic message arrived during the night to say that his daughter had given birth to twins. The dream-work took control of the news, allowed the unconscious wish 
to operate on it - the wish that he could put his daughter in the place of his second wife - and thus arose the 
puzzling manifest dream, which disguised the wish and di storted the message. We must admit that it is only 
the interpretation of the dream that has shown us that it was a telepathic one: psycho-analysis has revealed 
a telepathic event which we should not otherwise have discovered.    But pray do not let yourselves be misled! In spite of all this, dream-interpretation has told us nothing about 
the objective reality of the telepathic event. It may equally be an illusion which can be explained in another 
way. The man’s latent dream-thoughts may have run: ‘To- day is the day the confinement should take place 
if my daughter is really out in her reckoning by a month, as I suspect. And when I saw her last she looked 
just as though she was going to have twins. How my dead wife who has so fond of children would have rejoiced over twins!’ (I base this last factor on some associations of the dreamer’s which I have not 
mentioned.) In that case the instigation to the dream would have been well-grounded suspicions on the 
dreamer’s part and not a telepathic message; but the outcome would remain the same. You see then that even the interpretation of this dream has told us nothing on the question of whether we are to allow 
objective reality to telepathy. That could only be decided by a thorough-going investigation of all the 
circumstances of the case - which was unfortunately no more possible in this instance than in any of the others in my experience. Granted that the telepathy hy pothesis offers by far the simplest explanation, yet 
that does not help us much. The simplest explanation is not always the correct one; the truth is often no 
simple matter, and before deciding in favour of such a far-reaching hypothesis we should like to have taken every precaution.  
   We may now leave the subject of dreams and telepathy: I have nothing more to say to you on it. But 
kindly observe that what seemed to us to teach us something about telepathy was not the dream but the interpretation of the dream, its psycho-analytic working-over. Accordingly, in what follows we may leave 
dreams entirely on one side and may follow an expectation that the employment of psycho-analysis may 
throw a little light on other events described as occult. There is, for instance, the phenomenon of thought-transference, which is so close to telepathy and can indeed without much violence be regarded as the 
same thing. It claims that mental processes in one person - ideas, emotional states, conative impulses - 
can be transferred to another person through empty space without employing the familiar methods of communication by means of words and signs. You will realize how remarkable, and perhaps even of what 
great practical importance, it would be if something of the kind really happened. It may be noted, 
incidentally, that strangely enough precisely this phenomenon is referred to least frequently in the miraculous stories of the past.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4651  
 
   I have formed an impression in the course of the p sycho-analytic treatment of patients that the activities 
of professional fortune-tellers conceal an opportunity for making particularly unobjectionable observations 
on thought-transference. These are insignificant and even inferior people, who immerse themselves in some sort of performance - lay out cards, study writing or lines upon the palm of the hand, or make astrological calculations - and at the same time, after having shown themselves familiar with portions of 
their visitor’s past or present circumstances, go on to prophesy their future. As a rule their clients exhibit 
great satisfaction over these achievements and feel no resentment if later on these prophecies are not 
fulfilled. I have come across several such cases and have been able to study them analytically, and in a 
moment I will tell you the most remarkable of t hese instances. Their convincingness is unfortunately 
impaired by the numerous reticences to which I am compelled by the obligation of medical discretion. I 
have, however, of set purpose avoided distortions. So listen now to the story of one of my women patients, 
who had an experience of this kind with a fortune-teller. 
    She had been the eldest of a numerous family and had grown up with an extremely strong attachment to her father. She had married young and had found entire satisfaction in her marriage. Only one thing was 
wanting to her happiness: she had remained childless, so she could not bring her beloved husband 
completely into the place of her father. When, after long years of disappointment, she decided to undergo a gynaecological operation, her husband revealed to her that the blame was his: an illness before their 
marriage had made him incapable of procreating child ren. She took the disappointment badly, became 
neurotic and clearly suffered from fears of being tempted. To cheer her up, he took her with him on a 
business trip to Paris. They were sitting there one day in the hall of their hotel when she noticed a stir 
among the hotel servants. She asked what was going on and was told that Monsieur le Professeur had 
arrived and was giving consultations in a little room over there. She expressed a wish to have a try. Her husband rejected the idea, but while he was not watching she slipped into the consulting-room and faced the fortune-teller. She was 27 years old, but looked much younger and had taken off her wedding-ring. 
Monsieur le Professeur made her lay her hand on a tray filled with ashes and carefully studied the imprint; 
he then told her all kinds of things about hard struggles that lay before her, and ended with the comforting assurance that all the same she would still get married and would have two children by the time she was 
32. When she told me this story she was 43 years old, seriously ill and without any prospect of ever having 
a child. Thus the prophecy had not come true; yet she spoke of it without any sort of bitterness but with an unmistakable expression of satisfaction, as though she were recalling a cheerful event. It was easy to 
establish that she had not the slightest notion of what the two numbers in the prophecy might mean or 
whether they meant anything at all.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4652  
 
   You will say that this is a stupid and incomprehensible story and ask why I have told it you. I should be 
entirely of your opinion if - and this is the salient point - analysis had not made it possible to arrive at an 
interpretation of the prophecy which is convincing precisely from the explanation it affords of the details. For the two numbers find their place in the life of my patient’s mother . She had married late - not till she was 
over thirty, and in the family they had often dwelt on the fact of the success with which she had hastened to 
make up for lost time. Her two first children (with our patient the elder) had been born with the shortest 
possible interval between them, in a single calendar year; and she had in fact two children by the time she was 32. What Monsieur le Professeur had said to my pat ient meant therefore: ‘Take comfort from the fact of 
being so young. You’ll have the same destiny as your mother, who also had to wait a long time for children, and you’ll have two children by the time you’re 32.’ But to have the same destiny as her mother, to put herself in her mother’s place, to take her place with her father - that had been the strongest wish of her 
youth, the wish on account of whose non-fulfilment she was just beginning to fall ill. The prophecy promised 
her that the wish would still be fulfilled in spite of everything; how could she fail to feel friendly to the prophet? Do you regard it as possible, however, that Monsieur le Professeur was familiar with the facts of the intimate family history of his chance client? Ou t of the question! How, then, did he arrive at the 
knowledge which enabled him to give expression to my patient’s strongest and most secret wish by including the two numbers in his prophecy? I can see only two possible explanations. Either the story as it was told me is untrue and the events occurred otherwise, or thought-transference exists as a real 
phenomenon. One can suppose, no doubt, that after an interval of 16 years the patient had introduced the 
two numbers concerned into her recollection from her unconscious. I have no basis for this suspicion, but I cannot exclude it, and I imagine that you will be readier to believe in a way out of that kind than in the reality 
of thought-transference. If you do decide on the latter c ourse, do not forget that it was only analysis that 
created the occult fact - uncovered it when it lay distorted to the point of being unrecognizable. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4653  
 
 
   If it were a question of one case only like that of my patient, one would shrug it aside. No one would 
dream of erecting upon a single observation a belief which implies taking such a decisive line. But you must 
believe me when I assure you that this is not the only case in my experience. I have collected a whole number of such prophecies and from all of them I gained the impression that the fortune-teller had merely 
brought to expression the thoughts, and more especially the secret wishes, of those who were questioning 
him, and that we were therefore justified in analysing these prophecies as though they were subjective products, phantasies or dreams of the people concerned. Not every case, of course, is equally convincing 
and in not every case is it equally possible to exclude more rational explanations; but, taking them as a 
whole, there remains a strong balance of probability in  favour of thought-transference as a fact. The 
importance of the subject would justify me in producing all my cases to you; but that I cannot do, owing to 
the prolixity of description that would be involved and to the inevitable breach of the obligations of 
discretion. I will try so far as possible to appease my conscience in giving you a few more examples.     One day I was visited by a highly intelligent young man, a student preparing for his final examinations for 
a doctorate, but unable to take them since, as he complained, he had lost all interest and power of 
concentration and even any faculty for orderly memory. The previous history of this condition of quasi-paralysis was soon revealed: he had fallen ill after carrying out a great act of self-discipline. He had a sister, 
to whom he was attached by an intense but always restrained devotion, just as she was to him. ‘What a pity 
we can’t get married!’ they would often say to each other. A respectable man fell in love with the sister; she responded to his affection, but her parents did not assent to the union. In their difficulty the young couple 
turned to her brother, nor did he refuse his help. He made it possible for them to correspond with each 
other, and his influence eventually persuaded the parents to consent. In the course of the engagement, however, an occurrence took place whose meaning it was easy to guess. He went with his future brother-in-law on a difficult mountain-climb without a guide; they lost their way and were in danger of not returning 
safe and sound. Shortly after his sister’s marriage he fell into this condition of mental exhaustion. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4654  
 
   The influence of psycho-analysis restored his ability to work and he left me in order to go in for his 
examinations; but after he had passed them successfully he came back to me for a short time in the 
autumn of the same year. It was then that he related a remarkable experience to me which he had had before the summer. In his University town there lived a fortune-teller who enjoyed great popularity. Even the Princes of the Royal House used to consult her before important undertakings. Her mode of operation was 
very simple. She asked to be given the date of the relevant person’s birth; she required to know nothing 
else about him, not even his name. She then proceeded to consult her astrological books, made long calculations and finally uttered a prophecy relating to the person in question. My patient decided to call 
upon her mystical arts in connection with his brother-in-law. He visited her and told her the relevant date. 
After carrying out her calculations she made her prophecy: ‘The person in question will die in July or August of this year of crayfish- or oyster-poisoning.’ My patient finished his story with the words: ‘It was quite 
marvellous!’ 
   From the first I had listened with irritation. After this exclamation of his I went so far as to ask: ‘What do you see that’s so marvellous in this prophecy? Here we are in late autumn and your brother-in-law isn’t dead or you’d have told me long ago. So the prophecy hasn’t come true.’ ‘No doubt that’s so,’ he replied, 
‘but here is what’s marvellous. My brother-in-law is passionately devoted to crayfish and oysters and in the 
previous summer - that’s to say, before my visit to the fortune-teller - he had an attack of oyster-poisoning 
of which he nearly died.’ What was I to say to this? I could only feel annoyed that this highly-educated man 
(who had moreover been through a successful analysis) should not have a clearer view of the position. I for 
my part, rather than believe that it is possible to calculate the onset of an attack of crayfish- or oyster-poisoning from astrological tables, prefer to suppose that my patient had not yet overcome his hatred for his 
rival, the repression of which had earlier led to his falling ill, and that the fortune-teller was simply giving 
expression to his own expectation: ‘a taste of that kind isn’t to be given up, and one day, all the same, it will be the end of him.’ I must admit that I cannot think of any other explanation for this case, unless, perhaps, that my patient was having a joke with me. But neither then nor at a later time did he give me grounds for 
such a suspicion, and he seemed to be meaning what he said seriously. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4655  
 
 
   Here is another case. A young man in a position of consequence was involved in a liaison with a demi-
mondaine  which was characterized by a curious compulsion. He was obliged from time to time to provoke 
her with derisive and insulting remarks till she was driven to complete desperation. When he had brought 
her to that point, he was relieved, became reconciled with her and made her a present. But now he wanted 
to be free of her: the compulsion seemed to him uncanny. He noticed that this liaison was damaging his 
reputation; he wanted to have a wife of his own and to raise a family. But since he could not get free from 
this demi-mondaine  by his own strength, he called analysis to his help. After one of these abusive scenes, 
when the analysis had already started, he got her to write something on a piece of paper, so as to show it to a graphologist. The report that he received from him was that the writing was that of someone in extreme despair, who would certainly commit suicide in the next few days. This did not, it is true, occur and the lady 
remained alive; but the analysis succeeded in loosening his bonds. He left the lady and turned to a young 
girl who he expected would be able to make him a good wife. Soon afterwards a dream appeared which could only hint at a dawning doubt as to the girl’s worthiness. He obtained a specimen of her writing too, took it to the same authority, and was given a verd ict on her writing which confirmed his apprehensions. He 
therefore abandoned the idea of making her his wife.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4656  
 
   In order to form an opinion of the graphologist’s reports, especially the first one, we must know something 
of our subject’s secret history. In his early youth he had (in accordance with his passionate nature) fallen in 
love to the pitch of frenzy with a married woman who was still young but nevertheless older than he was. When she rejected him, he made an attempt at suicide which, there can be no doubt, was seriously intended. It was only by a hair’s breadth that he escaped death and he was only restored after a long period 
of nursing. But this wild action made a deep impression on the woman he loved; she granted him her 
favours, he became her lover and thenceforward remained secretly attached to her and served her with a truly chivalrous devotion. More than twenty years la ter, when they had both grown older - but the woman, 
naturally, more than he - the need was awakened in him to detach himself from her, to make himself free, to lead a life of his own, to set up a house and raise a family. And along with this feeling of satiety there arose in him his long-suppressed craving for vengeance on his mistress. As he had once tried to kill himself 
because she had spurned him, so he wished now to hav e the satisfaction of her seeking death because he 
left her. But his love was still too strong for it to be possible for this wish to become conscious in him; nor 
was he in a position to do her enough harm to drive her into death. In this frame of mind he took on the demi-mondaine  as a sort of whipping-boy, to satisfy his thirst for revenge in corpore vili ; and he allowed 
himself to practise upon her all the torments which he might expect would bring about with her the result he wished to produce on his mistress. The fact that the vengeance applied to the latter was betrayed by his making her into a confidante and adviser in his liaison  instead of concealing his defection from her. The 
wretched woman, who had long fallen from giving to receiving favours, probably suffered more from his confidences than the demi-mondaine  did from his brutalities. The compulsion of which he complained in 
regard to this substitutive figure, and which drove him to analysis, had of course been transferred on to her 
from his old mistress; it was from her that he wanted to free himself but could not. I am not an authority on 
handwriting and have no high opinion of the art of divining character from it; still less do I believe in the possibility of foretelling the writer’s future in this way. You can see, however, whatever one may think of the value of graphology, that there is no mistaking the fact that the expert, when he promised that the writer of 
the specimen presented to him would commit suicide in the next few days, had once again only brought to 
light a powerful secret wish of the person who was questioning him. Something of the same kind happened afterwards in the case of the second report. What was there concerned, however, was not an unconscious 
wish; it was the questioner’s dawning doubt and apprehension that found a clear expression from the 
graphologist’s mouth. Incidentally, my patient succeeded, with the help of analysis, in finding an object for his love outside the magic circle in which he had been spellbound. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4657  
 
 
   Ladies and Gentlemen, - You have now heard how dream-interpretation and psycho-analysis in general 
assist occultism. I have shown you from examples that by their application occult facts have been brought 
to light which would otherwise have remained unknown. Psycho-analysis cannot give a direct answer to the question that no doubt interests you the most - whether we are to believe in the objective reality of these 
findings. But the material revealed by its help makes an impression which is at all events favourable to an 
affirmative reply. Your interest will not come to a st op at this point, however. You will want to know what 
conclusions are justified by the incomparably richer material in which psycho-analysis has no part. But I 
cannot follow you there: it lies outside my province. The only further thing I could do would be to report 
observations to you which have at least so much relation to analysis that they were made during psycho-analytic treatment and were even perhaps made possible by its influence. I will tell you one such example - 
the one which has left the strongest impression behind on me. I shall tell it at great length and shall ask for 
your attention to a large number of details, though even so I shall have to suppress much that would have greatly increased the convincing force of the observation. It is an example in which the fact came clearly to light and did not need to be developed by analysis. In discussing it, however, we shall not be able to do 
without the help of analysis. But I will tell you in  advance that this example too of apparent thought-
transference in the analytic situation is not exempt fr om all doubts and that it does not allow us to take up 
an unqualified position in support of the reality of occult phenomena.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4658  
 
   Listen then:- One autumn day in the year 1919, at about 10.45 a.m., Dr. David Forsyth, who had just 
arrived from London, sent in his card to me while I was working with a patient. (My respected colleague 
from London University will not, I feel sure, regard it as an indiscretion if in this way I betray the fact that he spent some months being initiated by me into the arts of psycho-analytic technique.) I only had time to greet him and to make an appointment to see him later. Dr. Forsyth had a claim to my particular interest; he 
was the first foreigner to come to me after I had been cut off by the war years and to bring a promise of 
better times. Soon afterwards, at eleven o’clock, Herr P., one of my patients, arrived - an intelligent and agreeable man, between forty and fifty years of age, who had originally come to me on account of 
difficulties with women. His case did not promise any therapeutic success; I had long before proposed our 
stopping the treatment, but he had wished to continue it, evidently because he felt comfortable in a well-tempered father-transference to me. At that period money played no part: there was too little of it about. 
The sessions which I spent with him were stimulating and refreshing for me as well, and consequently, in 
disregard of the strict rules of medical practice, analytic work was being carried on up to a foreseen time-limit.    That day P. returned to his attempts at having erotic relations with women and once again mentioned a 
pretty, piquante, penniless girl, with whom he felt he might succeed, if the fact of her being a virgin did not 
scare him off any serious attempt. He had often talked of her before but that day he told me for the first time that, though of course she had no notion of the true grounds of his impediment, she used to call him ‘Herr 
von Vorsicht’. I was struck by this information; Dr. Forsyth’s visiting card lay beside me, and I showed it to 
him.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4659  
 
   These are the facts of the case. I expect they will seem to you paltry; but listen a little longer, there is 
more behind them. 
   When he was young, P. had spent some years in England and since then had retained a permanent interest in English literature. He possessed a rich English library and used to bring me books from it. I owe to him an acquaintance with such authors as Bennett and Galsworthy, of whom till then I had read little. 
One day he lent me a novel of Galsworthy’s with the title The Man of Property, whose scene is laid in the 
bosom of a family invented by the author, bearing the name of ‘Forsyte’. Galsworthy himself was evidently 
captivated by this creation of his, for in later volumes he repeatedly came back to the members of this family and finally collected all the tales relating to them under the title of The Forsyte Saga . Only a few days 
before the occurrence I am speaking of, he had brought me a fresh volume from this series. The name 
‘Forsyte’, and everything typical that the author had sought to embody in it, had played a part, too, in my 
conversations with P. and it had become part of the secret language which so easily grows up between two 
people who see a lot of each other. Now the name ‘Forsyte’ in these novels differs little from that of my visitor ‘Forsyth’ and, as pronounced by a German, the two can scarcely be distinguished; and there is an English word with a meaning - ‘foresight’ - which we should also pronounce in the same way and which 
would be translated ‘ Voraussicht ’ or ‘Vorsicht ’. Thus P. had in fact selected from his personal concerns the 
very name with which I was occupied at the same time as a result of an occurrence of which he was 
unaware. 
   That begins to look better, you will agree. But we shall, I think, receive a stronger impression of the 
striking phenomenon and even obtain an insight into its determinants, if we throw some analytic light upon two other associations brought up by P. during the same session. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4660  
 
   Firstly: One day of the previous week I had waited in vain for Herr P. at eleven o’clock, and had then gone 
out to visit Dr. Anton von Freund in his pension. I was surprised to find that Herr P. lived on another floor of 
the same building in which the pension was located. In connection with this I had later told P. that I had in a 
sense paid him a visit in his house; but I know definitely that I did not tell him the name of the person I visited in the pension. And now, shortly after mentioning ‘Herr von Vorsicht’ he asked me whether perhaps 
the Freud-Ottorego who was giving a course of lectures on English at the Volks universität’ was my daughter. And for the first time during our long period of intercourse he gave my name the distorted form to which I have indeed become habituated by functionaries, officials and compositors: instead of ‘Freud’ he 
said ‘Freund’. 
   Secondly: At the end of the same session he told me a dream, from which he had woken in a fright - a regular ‘Alptraum’, he said. He added that not long ago he had forgotten the English word for that, and 
when someone had asked him said that the English for ‘ Alptraum’ was ‘a mare’s next’. This was nonsense, 
of course, he went on; ‘a mare’s nest’ meant something incredible, a cock-and-bull story: the translation of 
‘Alptraum’ was ‘nightmare’. The only element in common between this association and the previous one seemed to be the element ‘English’. I was however reminded of a small incident which had occurred about 
a month earlier. P. was sitting with me in the room when another visitor, a dear friend from London, Dr. 
Ernest Jones, unexpectedly came in after a long separation. I signed to him to go into the next room while I finished with P. The latter, however, had at once recognized him from his photograph hanging in the 
waiting-room, and even expressed a wish to be introduced to him. Now Jones is the author of a monograph 
on the Alptraum - the nightmare. I did not know whether P. was acquainted with it; he avoided reading 
analytic literature. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4661  
 
   I should like to begin by putting before you an investigation of what analytic understanding can be arrived 
at of the background of P.’s associations and of the motives for them. P. was placed similarly to me in 
relation to the name ‘Forsyte’ or ‘Forsyth’; it meant the same to him, and it was entirely to him that I owed my acquaintance with the name. The remarkable fact was that he brought the name into the analysis unheralded, only the briefest time after it had become significant to me in another sense owing to a new 
event - the London doctor’s arrival. But the manner in which the name emerged in his analytic session is 
perhaps not less interesting than the fact itself. He did not say, for instance: ‘The name "Forsyte", out of the novels you are familiar with, has just occurred to me.’ He was able, without any conscious relation to that 
source, to weave the name into his own experiences and to produce it thence - a thing that might have 
happened long before but had not happened till then. What he did say now was: ‘I’m a Forsyth too: that’s 
what the girl calls me.’ It is hard to mistake the mixture of jealous demand and melancholy self-depreciation 
which finds its expression in this remark. We shall not be going astray if we complete it in some such way 
as this: ‘It’s mortifying to me that your thoughts should be so intensely occupied with this new arrival. Do come back to me; after all I’m a Forsyth too though it’s true I’m only a Herr von Vorsicht, as the girl says.’ And thereupon his train of thought, passing along the associative threads of the element ‘English’ went 
back to two earlier events, which were able to stir up the same feelings of jealousy. ‘A few days ago you 
paid a visit to my house - not, alas, to me but to a Herr von Freund.’ This thought caused him to distort the name ‘Freud’ into ‘Freund’. The ‘Freud-Ottorego’ from the lecture-syllabus must come in here because as a 
teacher of English she provided the manifest association. And now came the recollection of another visitor 
a few weeks before, of whom he was no doubt equally jealous, but for whom he also felt he was no match, for Dr. Jones was able to write a monograph on the nightmare whereas he was at best only able to produce 
such dreams himself. His mention of his mistake about the meaning of ‘a mare’s nest’ comes into this 
connection, for it can only mean to say: ‘After all I’m not a genuine Englishman any more than I’m a genuine Forsyth.’    Now I cannot describe his feelings of jealousy as either out of place or unintelligible. He had been warned 
that his analysis, and at the same time our contact, would come to an end as soon as foreign pupils and 
patients returned to Vienna; and that was in fact what happened shortly afterwards. What we have so far achieved, however, has been a piece of analytic work - the explanation of three associations brought up by 
him in the same session and nourished by the same motive: and this has not much to do with the other question of whether these associations could or could not have been made without thought-transference. 
This question arises in the case of each of the th ree associations and thus falls into three separate 
questions: Could P. have known that Dr. Forsyth had just paid me his first visit? Could he know the name of the person I had visited in his house? Did he know that Dr. Jones had written a monograph on the nightmare? Or was it only my knowledge about these things that was revealed in his associations? It will 
depend on the reply to these separate questions whether my observation allows of a conclusion favourable to thought-transference.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4662  
 
   Let us leave the first question aside for a while; the other two can be dealt with more easily. The case of 
my visit to his pension makes a particularly convincing impression at first sight. I am certain that in my 
short, joking reference to my visit to his house I mentioned no name. I think it is most unlikely that P. made 
enquiries at the pension as to the name of the person concerned; I be lieve rather that the existence of that 
person remained entirely unknown to him. But the evidential value of this case is totally destroyed by a 
chance circumstance. The man whom I had visited at the pension was not only called ‘Freund’; he was a 
true friend to us all. He was Dr. Anton von Freund whose donation had made the foundation of our publishing house possible. His early death, together with that of our colleague Karl Abraham a few years 
later, are the gravest misfortunes which have befa llen the growth of psycho-analysis. It is possible, 
therefore, that I had said to Herr P.: ‘I visited a friend in your house’ and with this possibility the occult 
interest of his second association vanishes. 
   The impression made by the third association evaporates equally quickly. Could P. know that Jones had 
published a monograph on the nightmare if he never r ead any analytic literature? Yes, he could. He 
possessed books from our publishing house and could in any case have seen the titles of the new publications advertised on the wrappers. This cannot be proved, but neither can it be disproved. We can 
reach no decision, therefore, along this path. To my regret, this observation of mine suffers from the same weakness as so many similar ones: it was written down too late and was discussed at a time when I was no longer seeing Herr P. and could not question him further. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4663  
 
   Let us go back to the first event, which even taken by itself supports the apparent fact of thought-
transference. Could P. know that Dr. Forsyth had been with me a quarter of an hour before him? Could he 
have any knowledge at all of his existence or of his presence in Vienna? We must not give way to an inclination to deny both questions flatly. I can see a way that leads to a partly affirmative answer. I may after all have told Herr P. that I was expecting a doctor from England for instruction in analysis, as a first dove 
after the Deluge. This might have happened in the summer of 1919, for Dr. Forsyth had made 
arrangements with me by letter some months before his arrival. I may even have mentioned his name, though that seems to me most improbable. In view of the other connection which the name carried for both 
of us, a discussion of it must inevitably have followed, of which something would have remained in my 
memory. Nevertheless such a discussion may have taken place and I may have totally forgotten it afterwards, so that it became possible for the emergence of ‘Herr von Vorsicht’ in the analytic session to 
strike me as a miracle. If one regards oneself as a sceptic, it is a good plan to have occasional doubts 
about one’s scepticism too. It may be that I too have a secr et inclination towards the miraculous which thus 
goes half way to meet the creation of occult facts.    If we have thus got one miraculous possibility out of  the way, there is another waiting for us, and the most 
difficult of all. Assuming that Herr P. knew that there was a Dr. Forsyth and that he was expected in Vienna in the autumn, how is it to be explained that he becam e receptive to his presence on the very day of his 
arrival and immediately after his first visit? One might say it was chance - that is, leave it unexplained. But it 
was precisely in order to exclude chance that I discussed P.’s other two associations, in order to show you 
that he was really occupied with jealous thoughts about people who visited me. Or one might, not to neglect the most extreme possibility, experiment with the hypothesis that P. had observed a special excitement 
about me (which, to be sure, I myself knew nothing of) and drew his conclusion from it. Or Herr P. (though 
he arrived a quarter of an hour after the Englishman left) met him on the short stretch of street which they 
both had to pass along, recognized him by his characteristically English appearance and, being in a permanent state of jealous expectation, thought: ‘Ah, so that’s Dr. Forsyth with whose arrival my analysis is 
to come to an end! And he’s probably just come straight from the Professor.’ I cannot carry these 
rationalistic speculations any further. We are once again left with a non liquet ; but I must confess that I have 
a feeling that here too the scales weigh in favour of  thought-transference. Moreover, I am certainly not 
alone in having been in the position of experiencing ‘occult ’ events like this in the analytic situation. Helene 
Deutsch published some similar observations in 1926 and studied the question of their being determined by the transference relations between patient and analyst. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4664  
 
 
   I am sure you will not feel very well satisfied with my attitude to this problem - with my not being entirely 
convinced but prepared to be convinced. You may perhaps say to yourselves: ‘Here’s another case of a man who has done honest work as a scientist all through his life and has grown feeble-minded, pious and credulous in his old age.’ I am aware that a few great names must be included in this class, but you should 
not reckon me among them. At least I have not become pious, and I hope not credulous. It is only that, if 
one has gone about all one’s life bending in order to avoid a painful collision with the facts, so too in one’s old age one still keeps one’s back ready to bow before new realities. No doubt you would like me to hold 
fast to a moderate theism and show myself relentless in my rejection of everything occult. But I am 
incapable of currying favour and I must urge you to have kindlier thoughts on the objective possibility of thought-transference and at the same time of telepathy as well. 
   You will not forget that here I am only treating these problems in so far as it is possible to approach them 
from the direction of psycho-analysis. When they first came into my range of vision more than ten years ago, I too felt a dread of a threat against our scientific Weltanschauung, which, I feared, was bound to give 
place to spiritualism or mysticism if portions of occultism were proved true. To-day I think otherwise. In my 
opinion it shows no great confidence in science if one does not think it capable of assimilating and working 
over whatever may perhaps turn out to be true in the assertions of occultists. And particularly so far as thought-transference is concerned, it seems actually to favour the extension of the scientific - or, as our 
opponents say, the mechanistic - mode of thought to the mental phenomena which are so hard to lay hold 
of. The telepathic process is supposed to consist in a mental act in one person instigating the same mental act in another person. What lies between these two mental acts may easily be a physical process into 
which the mental one is transformed at one end and which is transformed back once more into the same 
mental one at the other end. The analogy with other transformations, such as occur in speaking and hearing by telephone, would then be unmistakable. And only think if one could get hold of this physical equivalent of the psychical act! It would seem to me that psycho-analysis, by inserting the unconscious 
between what is physical and what was previously called ‘psychical’, has paved the way for the assumption 
of such processes as telepathy. If only one accustoms oneself to the idea of telepathy, one can accomplish a great deal with it - for the time being, it is true, only in imagination. It is a familiar fact that we do not know 
how the common purpose comes about in the great insect communities: possibly it is done by means of a 
direct psychical transference of this kind. One is led to a suspicion that this is the original, archaic method of communication between individuals and that in the c ourse of phylogenetic evolution it has been replaced 
by the better method of giving information with the help of signals which are picked up by the sense organs. 
But the older method might have persisted in the background and still be able to put itself into effect under certain conditions - for instance, in passionately excited mobs. All this is still uncertain and full of unsolved 
riddles; but there is no reason to be frightened by it. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4665  
 
   If there is such a thing as telepathy as a real process, we may suspect that, in spite of its being so hard to 
demonstrate, it is quite a common phenomenon. It would tally with our expectations if we were able to point 
to it particularly in the mental life of children. Here we are reminded of the frequent anxiety felt by children over the idea that their parents know all their thoughts without having to be told them - an exact counterpart and perhaps the source of the belief of adults in the omniscience of God. A short time ago Dorothy 
Burlingham, a trustworthy witness, in a paper on child analysis and the mother published some 
observations which, if they can be confirmed, w ould be bound to put an end to the remaining doubts on the 
reality of thought-transference. She made use of the si tuation, no longer a rare one, in which a mother and 
child are simultaneously in analysis, and reported some remarkable events such as the following. One day the mother spoke during her analytic session of a gold coin that had played a particular part in one of the scenes of her childhood. Immediately afterwards, after she had returned home, her little boy, about ten 
years old, came to her room and brought her a gold coin which he asked her to keep for him. She asked 
him in astonishment where he had got it from. He had been given it on his birthday; but his birthday had been several months earlier and there was no reason why the child should have remembered the gold coin precisely then. The mother reported the occurrence to the child’s analyst and asked her to find out from the 
child the reason for his action. But the child’s analysis threw no light on the matter; the action had forced its 
way that day into the child’s life like a foreign body. A few weeks later the mother was sitting at her writing-desk to write down, as she had been told to do, an account of the experience, when in came the boy and 
asked for the gold coin back, as he wanted to take it with him to show in his analytic session. Once again 
the child’s analysis could discover no explanation of his wish.    And this brings us back to psycho-analysis, which was what we started out from. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4666  
 
LECTURE XXXI 
 
THE DISSECTION OF THE PSYCHICAL PERSONALITY 
 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN , - I know you are aware in regard to your own relations, whether with people or 
things, of the importance of your starting-point. This was also the case with psycho-analysis. It has not 
been a matter of indifference for the course of its development or for the reception it met with that it began its work on what is, of all the contents of the mind,  most foreign to the ego - on symptoms. Symptoms are 
derived from the repressed, they are, as it were, it s representatives before the ego; but the repressed is 
foreign territory to the ego - internal foreign territory - just as reality (if you will forgive the unusual expression) is external foreign territory. The path led from symptoms to the unconscious, to the life of the 
instincts, to sexuality; and it was then that psycho-analysis was met by the brilliant objection that human 
beings are not merely sexual creatures but have nobler and higher impulses as well. It might have been added that, exalted by their consciousness of these higher impulses, they often assume the right to think nonsense and to neglect facts. 
   You know better. From the very first we have said that human beings fall ill of a conflict between the 
claims of instinctual life and the resistance which aris es within them against it; and not for a moment have 
we forgotten this resisting, repelling, repressing agency, which we thought of as equipped with its special 
forces, the ego-instincts, and which coincides with the ego of popular psychology. The truth was merely 
that, in view of the laborious nature of the progress made by scientific work, even psycho-analysis was not able to study every field simultaneously and to express its views on every problem in a single breath. But at 
last the point was reached when it was possible for us to divert our attention from the repressed to the 
repressing forces, and we faced this ego, which had seemed so self-evident, with the secure expectation that here once again we should find things for which we could not have been prepared. It was not easy, however, to find a first approach; and that is what I intend to talk to you about to-day. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4667  
 
   I must, however, let you know of my suspicion that this account of mine of ego-psychology will affect you 
differently from the introduction into the psychical underworld which preceded it. I cannot say with certainty 
why this should be so. I thought first that you would disco ver that whereas what I reported to you previously 
were, in the main, facts, however strange and peculiar, now you will be listening principally to opinions - that is, to speculations. But that does not meet the position. After further consideration I must maintain that 
the amount of intellectual working-over of the factual material in our ego-psychology is not much greater 
than it was in the psychology of the neuroses. I have been obliged to reject other explanations as well of 
the result I anticipate: I now believe that it is som ehow a question of the nature of the material itself and of 
our being unaccustomed to dealing with it. In any case, I shall not be surprised if you show yourselves even more reserved and cautious in your judgement than hitherto.  
   The situation in which we find ourselves at t he beginning of our enquiry may be expected itself to point 
the way for us. We wish to make the ego the matter of our enquiry, our very own ego. But is that possible? 
After all, the ego is in its very essence a subject; how  can it be made into an object? Well, there is no doubt 
that it can be. The ego can take itself as an object, can treat itself like other objects, can observe itself, 
criticize itself, and do Heaven knows what with itself. In this, one part of the ego is setting itself over against 
the rest. So the ego can be split; it splits itself during a number of its functions - temporarily at least. Its parts can come together again afterwards. That is not exactly a novelty, though it may perhaps be putting 
an unusual emphasis on what is generally known. On t he other hand, we are familiar with the notion that 
pathology, by making things larger and coarser, can draw our attention to normal conditions which would 
otherwise have escaped us. Where it points to a breach or a rent, there may normally be an articulation 
present. If we throw a crystal to the floor, it breaks; but not into haphazard pieces. It comes apart along its 
lines of cleavage into fragments whose boundaries, though they were invisible, were predetermined by the crystal’s structure. Mental patients are split and broken structures of this same kind. Even we cannot withhold from them something of the reverential awe which peoples of the past felt for the insane. They 
have turned away from external reality, but for that very reason they know more about internal, psychical reality and can reveal a number of things to us that would otherwise be inaccessible to us.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4668  
 
   We describe one group of these patients as suffering from delusions of being observed. They complain to 
us that perpetually, and down to their most intimate actions, they are being molested by the observation of 
unknown powers - presumably persons - and that in ha llucinations they hear these persons reporting the 
outcome of their observation: ‘now he’s going to say this, now he’s dressing to go out’ and so on. 
Observation of this sort is not yet the same thing as per secution, but it is not far from it; it presupposes that 
people distrust them, and expect to catch them carrying out forbidden actions for which they would be punished. How would it be if these insane people were righ t, if in each of us there is present in his ego an 
agency like this which observes and threatens to punish, and which in them has merely become sharply 
divided from their ego and mistakenly displaced into external reality? 
   I cannot tell whether the same thing will happen to you as to me. Ever since, under the powerful impression of this clinical picture, I formed the i dea that the separation of the observing agency from the 
rest of the ego might be a regular feature of the ego’s structure, that idea has never left me, and I was driven to investigate the further characteristics and connections of the agency which was thus separated 
off. The next step is quickly taken. The content of the delusions of being observed already suggests that the 
observing is only a preparation for judging and punishing, and we accordingly guess that another function 
of this agency must be what we call our conscience. There is scarcely anything else in us that we so 
regularly separate from our ego and so easily set over against it as precisely our conscience. I feel an inclination to do something that I think will give me pleasure, but I abandon it on the ground that my 
conscience does not allow it. Or I have let myself be persuaded by too great an expectation of pleasure into 
doing something to which the voice of conscience has objected and after the deed my conscience punishes me with distressing reproaches and causes me to feel remorse for the deed. I might simply say that the 
special agency which I am beginning to distinguish in the ego is conscience. But it is more prudent to keep 
the agency as something independent and to suppose that c onscience is one of its functions and that self-
observation, which is an essential preliminary to the j udging activity of conscience, is another of them. And 
since when we recognize that something has a separate ex istence we give it a name of its own, from this 
time forward I will describe this agency in the ego as the ‘ super-ego ’. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4669  
 
   I am now prepared to hear you ask me scornfully whether our ego-psychology comes down to nothing 
more than taking commonly used abstractions literally and in a crude sense, and transforming them from 
concepts into things - by which not much would be gained. To this I would reply that in ego-psychology it will be difficult to escape what is universally known; it will rather be a question of new ways of looking at things and new ways of arranging them than of new discoveries. So hold to your contemptuous criticism for 
the time being and await further explanations. The facts of pathology give our efforts a background that you 
would look for in vain in popular psychology. So I will proceed.    Hardly have we familiarized ourselves with the idea of a super-ego like this which enjoys a certain degree 
of autonomy, follows its own intentions and is independent of the ego for its supply of energy, than a clinical 
picture forces itself on our notice which throws a striking light on the severity of this agency and indeed its 
cruelty, and on its changing relations to the ego. I am thinking of the condition of melancholia, or, more 
precisely, of melancholic attacks, which you too will have heard plenty about, even if you are not 
psychiatrists. The most striking feature of this illne ss, of whose causation and mechanism we know much 
too little, is the way in which the super-ego - ‘conscience’, you may call it, quietly - treats the ego. While a 
melancholic can, like other people, show a greater or lesser degree of severity to himself in his healthy 
periods, during a melancholic attack his super-ego becomes over-severe, abuses the poor ego, humiliates 
it and ill-treats it, threatens it with the direst punishments, reproaches it for actions in the remotest past which had been taken lightly at the time - as though it had spent the whole interval in collecting accusations 
and had only been waiting for its present access of strength in order to bring them up and make a condemnatory judgement on their basis. The super-ego applies the strictest moral standard to the helpless ego which is at its mercy; in general it represents the cl aims of morality, and we realize all at once that our 
moral sense of guilt is the expression of the tension between the ego and the super-ego. It is a most remarkable experience to see morality, which is supposed to have been given us by God and thus deeply implanted in us, functioning as a periodic phenomenon. For after a certain number of months the whole moral fuss is over, the criticism of the super-ego is silent, the ego is rehabilitated and again enjoys all the 
rights of man till the next attack. In some forms of the disease, indeed, something of a contrary sort occurs 
in the intervals; the ego finds itself in a blissful stat e of intoxication, it celebrates a triumph, as though the 
super-ego had lost all its strength or had melted into the ego; and this liberated, manic ego permits itself a 
truly uninhibited satisfaction of all its appetites. Here are happenings rich in unsolved riddles! 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4670  
 
   No doubt you will expect me to give you more than a mere illustration when I inform you that we have 
found out all kinds of things about the formation of the super-ego - that is to say, about the origin of 
conscience. Following a well-known pronouncement of Kant ’s which couples the conscience within us with 
the starry Heavens, a pious man might well be tempted to honour these two things as the masterpieces of creation. The stars are indeed magnificent, but as regards conscience God has done an uneven and 
careless piece of work, for a large majority of men have brought along with them only a modest amount of it 
or scarcely enough to be worth mentioning. We are far from overlooking the portion of psychological truth that is contained in the assertion that conscience is of divine origin; but the thesis needs interpretation. 
Even if conscience is something ‘within us’, yet it is not so from the first. In this it is a real contrast to sexual 
life, which is in fact there from the beginning of life and not only a later addition. But, as is well known, 
young children are amoral and possess no internal inhibitions against their impulses striving for pleasure. 
The part which is later taken on by the super-ego is played to begin with by an external power, by parental 
authority. Parental influence governs the child by offering proofs of love and by threatening punishments which are signs to the child of loss of love and are bound to be feared on their own account. This realistic anxiety is the precursor of the later moral anxiety. So  long as it is dominant there is no need to talk of a 
super-ego and of a conscience. It is only subsequently t hat the secondary situation develops (which we are 
all too ready to regard as the normal one), where the external restraint is internalized and the super-ego takes the place of the parental agency and observes, directs and threatens the ego in exactly the same way 
as earlier the parents did with the child. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4671  
 
   The super-ego, which thus takes over the power, function and even the methods of the parental agency, 
is however not merely its successor but actually the legitimate heir of its body. It proceeds directly out of it, 
we shall learn presently by what process. First, however, we must dwell upon a discrepancy between the two. The super-ego seems to have made a one-sided choice and to have picked out only the parents’ strictness and severity, their prohibiting and punitive function, whereas their loving care seems not to have 
been taken over and maintained. If the parents have really enforced their authority with severity we can 
easily understand the child’s in turn developing a severe super-ego. But, contrary to our expectation, experience shows that the super-ego can acquire the same  characteristic of relentless severity even if the 
upbringing had been mild and kindly and had so far as possible avoided threats and punishments. We shall come back later to this contradiction when we deal with the transformations of instinct during the formation of the super-ego. 
   I cannot tell you as much as I should like about t he metamorphosis of the parental relationship into the 
super-ego, partly because that process is so complicated that an account of it will not fit into the framework 
of an introductory course of lectures such as I am trying to give you, but partly also because we our selves do not feel sure that we understand it completely. So you must be content with the sketch that follows. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4672  
 
   The basis of the process is what is called an ‘identification’ - that is to say, the assimilation of one ego to 
another one, as a result of which the first ego behaves like the second in certain respects, imitates it and in 
a sense takes it up into itself. Identification has been not unsuitably compared with the oral, cannibalistic 
incorporation of the other person. It is a very important form of attachment to someone else, probably the very first, and not the same thing as the choice of an object. The difference between the two can be 
expressed in some such way as this. If a boy identifies himself with his father, he wants to be like  his father; 
if he makes him the object of his choice, he wants to have him, to possess him. In the first case his ego is 
altered on the model of his father; in the second case that is not necessary. Identification and object-choice are to a large extent independent of each other; it is however possible to identify oneself with someone 
whom, for instance, one has taken as a sexual object, and to alter one’s ego on his model. It is said that the influencing of the ego by the sexual object occurs particularly often with women and is characteristic of 
femininity. I must already have spoken to you in my ear lier lectures of what is by far the most instructive 
relation between identification and object-choice. It can be observed equally easily in children and adults, in 
normal as in sick people. If one has lost an object or has been obliged to give it up, one often compensates oneself by identifying oneself with it and by setting it up once more in one’s ego, so that here object-choice 
regresses, as it were, to identification. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4673  
 
   I myself am far from satisfied with these remarks on identification; but it will be enough if you can grant 
me that the installation of the super-ego can be descri bed as a successful instance of identification with the 
parental agency. The fact that speaks decisively for this view is that this new creation of a superior agency 
within the ego is most intimately linked with the destiny of the Oedipus complex, so that the super-ego appears as the heir of that emotional attachment which is of such importance for childhood. With his 
abandonment of the Oedipus complex a child must, as we can see, renounce the intense object-cathexes 
which he has deposited with his parents, and it is as a co mpensation for this loss of objects that there is 
such a strong intensification of the identifications  with his parents which have probably long been present in 
his ego. Identifications of this kind as precipitat es of object-cathexes that have been given up will be 
repeated often enough later in the child’s life; but it is entirely in accordance with the emotional importance 
of this first instance of such a transformation that a special place in the ego should be found for its outcome. 
Close investigation has shown us, too, that the s uper-ego is stunted in its strength and growth if the 
surmounting of the Oedipus complex is only incompletely successful. In the course of development the super-ego also takes on the influences of those who have stepped into the place of parents - educators, teachers, people chosen as ideal models. Normally it departs more and more from the original parental 
figures; it becomes, so to say, more impersonal. Nor must it be forgotten that a child has a different 
estimate of its parents at different periods of its life.  At the time at which the Oedipus complex gives place 
to the super-ego they are something quite magnificent; but  later they lose much of this. Identifications then 
come about with these later parents as well, and indeed t hey regularly make important contributions to the 
formation of character; but in that case they onl y affect the ego, they no longer influence the super-ego, 
which has been determined by the earliest parental imagos. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4674  
 
   I hope you have already formed an impression that the hypothesis of the super-ego really describes a 
structural relation and is not merely a personification of some such abstraction as that of conscience. One 
more important function remains to be mentioned which we attribute to this super-ego. It is also the vehicle of the ego ideal by which the ego measures itself, which it emulates, and whose demand for ever greater 
perfection it strives to fulfil. There is no doubt that this  ego ideal is the precipitate of the old picture of the 
parents, the expression of admiration for the perfection which the child then attributed to them.     I am sure you have heard a great deal of the sense of inferiority which is supposed particularly to 
characterize neurotics. It especially haunts the pages of what are known as belles lettres . An author who 
uses the term ‘inferiority complex’ thinks that by so doing he has fulfilled all the demands of psycho-analysis 
and has raised his composition to a higher psychological plane. In fact ‘inferiority complex’ is a technical 
term that is scarcely used in psycho-analysis. For us it does not bear the meaning of anything simple, let 
alone elementary. To trace it back to the self-percept ion of possible organic defects, as the school of what 
are known as ‘Individual Psychologists’ likes to do, seems to us a short-sighted error. The sense of 
inferiority has strong erotic roots. A child feels inferior if he notices that he is not loved, and so does an 
adult. The only bodily organ which is really regarded as inferior is the atrophied penis, a girl’s clitoris. But 
the major part of the sense of inferiority derives from the ego’s relation to its super-ego; like the sense of guilt it is an expression of the tension between them. Altogether, it is hard to separate the sense of 
inferiority and the sense of guilt. It would perhaps be right to regard the former as the erotic complement to 
the moral sense of inferiority. Little attention has been given in psycho-analysis to the question of the delimitation of the two concepts. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4675  
 
   If only because the inferiority complex has become so popular, I will venture to entertain you here with a 
short digression. A historical personality of our ow n days, who is still alive though at the moment he has 
retired into the background, suffers from a defect in one of his limbs owing to an injury at the time of his 
birth. A very well-known contemporary writer who is particularly fond of compiling the biographies of celebrities has dealt, among others, with the life of the man I am speaking of. Now in writing a biography it 
may well be difficult to suppress a need to plumb the psychological depths. For this reason our author has 
ventured on an attempt to erect the whole of the dev elopment of his hero’s character on the sense of 
inferiority which must have been called up by his physical defect. In doing so, he has overlooked one small 
but not insignificant fact. It is usual for mothers whom Fate has presented with a child who is sickly or 
otherwise at a disadvantage to try to compensate him for his unfair handicap by a superabundance of love. In the instance before us, the proud mother behaved otherwise; she withdrew her love from the child on 
account of his infirmity. When he had grown up into a man of great power, he proved unambiguously by his 
actions that he had never forgiven his mother. When you consider the importance of a mother’s love for the mental life of a child, you will no doubt make a tacit correction of the biographer’s inferiority theory.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4676  
 
 
   But let us return to the super-ego. We have allotted it the functions of self-observation, of conscience and 
of the ideal. It follows from what we have said about its origin that it presupposes an immensely important biological fact and a fateful psychological one: namely, the human child’s long dependence on its parents and the Oedipus complex, both of which, again, are intimately interconnected. The super-ego is the 
representative for us of every moral restriction, the advocate of a striving towards perfection - it is, in short, 
as much as we have been able to grasp psychologically of what is described as the higher side of human life. Since it itself goes back to the influence of parents, educators and so on, we learn still more of its 
significance if we turn to those who are its sources. As a rule parents and authorities analogous to them 
follow the precepts of their own super-egos in educating children. Whatever understanding their ego may have come to with their super-ego, they are severe and exacting in educating children. They have forgotten 
the difficulties of their own childhood and they are glad to be able now to identify themselves fully with their 
own parents who in the past laid such severe restrictions upon them. Thus a child’s super-ego is in fact constructed on the model not of its parents but of its parents’ super-ego; the contents which fill it are the 
same and it becomes the vehicle of tradition and of all the time-resisting judgements of value which have 
propagated themselves in this manner from generation to generation. You may easily guess what important 
assistance taking the super-ego into account will give us in our understanding of the social behaviour of mankind - in the problem of delinquency, for instance - and perhaps even what practical hints on education. 
It seems likely that what are known as materialistic views of history sin in under-estimating this factor. They 
brush it aside with the remark that human ‘ideologies’ are nothing other than the product and superstructure of their contemporary economic conditions. That is tr ue, but very probably not the whole truth. Mankind 
never lives entirely in the present. The past, the tradi tion of the race and of the people, lives on in the 
ideologies of the super-ego, and yields only slowly to the influences of the present and to new changes; and so long as it operates through the super-ego it plays a powerful part in human life, independently of economic conditions. 
   In 1921 I endeavoured to make use of the differentiation between the ego and the super-ego in a study of 
group psychology. I arrived at a formula such as this: a psychological group is a collection of individuals who have introduced the same person into their supe r-ego and, on the basis of this common element, have 
identified themselves with one another in their ego. Th is applies, of course, only to groups that have a 
leader. If we possessed more applications of this kind, the hypothesis of the super-ego would lose its last 
touch of strangeness for us, and we should become completely free of the embarrassment that still comes 
over us when, accustomed as we are to the atmosphere of the underworld, we move in the more 
superficial, higher strata of the mental apparatus. We do not suppose, of course, that with the separation off 
of the super-ego we have said the last word on the psychol ogy of the ego. It is rather a first step; but in this 
case it is not only the first step that is hard.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4677  
 
 
   Now, however, another problem awaits us - at the opposite end of the ego, as we might put it. It is 
presented to us by an observation during the work of analysis, an observation which is actually a very old one. As not infrequently happens, it has taken a long time to come to the point of appreciating its importance. The whole theory of psycho-analysis is, as you know, in fact built up on the perception of the 
resistance offered to us by the patient when we attempt to make his unconscious conscious to him. The objective sign of this resistance is that his associations fail or depart widely from the topic that is being dealt with. He may also recognize the resistance subjectively  by the fact that he has distressing feelings when he 
approaches the topic. But this last sign may also be absent. We then say to the patient that we infer from his behaviour that he is now in a state of resistance; and he replies that he knows nothing of that, and is only aware that his associations have become more difficult. It turns out that we were right; but in that case 
his resistance was unconscious too, just as unconscious as the repressed, at the lifting of which we were 
working. We should long ago have asked the question:  from what part of his mind does an unconscious 
resistance like this arise? The beginner in psycho-analysis will be ready at once with the answer: it is, of 
course, the resistance of the unconscious. An ambiguous and unserviceable answer! If it means that the 
resistance arises from the repressed, we must rejoin: certainly not! We must rather attribute to the 
repressed a strong upward drive, an impulsion to break through into consciousness. The resistance can only be a manifestation of the ego, which originally put the repression into force and now wishes to maintain 
it. That, moreover, is the view we always took. Since we have come to assume a special agency in the ego, 
the super-ego, which represents demands of a restrictive and rejecting character, we may say that repression is the work of this super-ego and that it is carried out either by itself or by the ego in obedience 
to its orders. If then we are met by the case of the resistance in analysis not being conscious to the patient, 
this means either that in quite important situat ions the super-ego and the ego can operate unconsciously, or 
- and this would be still more important - that portions of both of them, the ego and the super-ego 
themselves, are unconscious. In both cases we have to reckon with the disagreeable discovery that on the 
one hand (super-) ego and conscious and on the other hand repressed and unconscious are far from 
coinciding.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4678  
 
 
   And here, Ladies and Gentlemen, I feel that I must make a pause to take breath - which you too will 
welcome as a relief - and, before I go on, to apologize to you. My intention is to give you some addenda to the introductory lectures on psycho-analysis which I began fifteen years ago, and I am obliged to behave as though you as well as I had in the interval done nothing but practise psycho-analysis. I know that that 
assumption is out of place; but I am helpless, I cannot do otherwise. This is no doubt related to the fact that 
it is in general so hard to give anyone who is not himself a psycho-analyst an insight into psycho-analysis. 
You can believe me when I tell you that we do not enjoy giving an impression of being members of a secret 
society and of practising a mystical science. Yet we have been obliged to recognize and express as our 
conviction that no one has a right to join in a discussion of psycho-analysis who has not had particular experiences which can only be obtained by being anal ysed oneself. When I gave you my lectures fifteen 
years ago I tried to spare you certain speculative portions of our theory; but it is precisely from them that 
are derived the new acquisitions of which I must speak to you to-day.     I return now to our topic. In face of the doubt whether the ego and super-ego are themselves unconscious 
or merely produce unconscious effects, we have, for good reasons, decided in favour of the former 
possibility. And it is indeed the case that large portions of the ego and super-ego can remain unconscious and are normally unconscious. That is to say, the individual knows nothing of their contents and it requires 
an expenditure of effort to make them conscious. It is a fact that ego and conscious, repressed and 
unconscious do not coincide. We feel a need to make a fundamental revision of our attitude to the problem of conscious-unconscious. At first we are inclined gr eatly to reduce the value of the criterion of being 
conscious since it has shown itself so untrustworthy. But we should be doing it an injustice. As may be said 
of our life, it is not worth much, but it is all we have. Without the illumination thrown by the quality of 
consciousness, we should be lost in the obscurity of depth-psychology; but we must attempt to find our bearings afresh. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4679  
 
   There is no need to discuss what is to be called conscious: it is removed from all doubt. The oldest and 
best meaning of the word ‘unconscious’ is the descriptive one; we call a psychical process unconscious 
whose existence we are obliged to assume - for some such reason as that we infer it from its effects -, but of which we know nothing. In that case we have the same relation to it as we have to a psychical process in another person, except that it is in fact one of our own. If we want to be still more correct, we shall modify 
our assertion by saying that we call a process unconscious if we are obliged to assume that it is being 
activated at the moment, though at the moment we know nothing about it. This qualification makes us 
reflect that the majority of conscious processes are conscious only for a short time; very soon they become 
latent , but can easily become conscious again. We might also say that they had become unconscious, if it 
were at all certain that in the condition of latency they are still something psychical. So far we should have 
learnt nothing new; nor should we have acquired the ri ght to introduce the concept of an unconscious into 
psychology. But then comes the new observation that we were already able to make in parapraxes. In order to explain a slip of the tongue, for instance, we find ourselves obliged to assume that the intention to make a particular remark was present in the subject. We infer it with certainty from the interference with his remark which has occurred; but the intention did not put itself through and was thus unconscious. If, when 
we subsequently put it before the speaker, he recognizes it as one familiar to him, then it was only 
temporarily unconscious to him; but if he repudiates it as something foreign to him, then it was permanently unconscious. From this experience we retrospectively obtain the right also to pronounce as something 
unconscious what had been described as latent. A consideration of these dynamic relations permits us now 
to distinguish two kinds of unconscious - one which is easily, under frequently occurring circumstances, transformed into something conscious, and another with which this transformation is difficult and takes 
place only subject to a considerable expenditure of effort or possibly never at all. In order to escape the 
ambiguity as to whether we mean the one or the other unconscious, whether we are using the word in the descriptive or in the dynamic sense, we make use of a permissible and simple way out. We call the unconscious which is only latent, and thus easily bec omes conscious, the ‘preconscious’ and retain the 
term ‘unconscious’ for the other. We now have three terms, ‘conscious’, ‘preconscious’ and ‘unconscious’, with which we can get along in our description of mental phenomena. Once again: the preconscious is also unconscious in the purely descriptive sense, but we do not give it that name, except in talking loosely or 
when we have to make a defence of the existence in mental life of unconscious processes in general. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4680  
 
   You will admit, I hope, that so far that is not t oo bad and allows of convenient handling. Yes, but unluckily 
the work of psycho-analysis has found itself compelled to use the word ‘unconscious’ in yet another, third, 
sense, and this may, to be sure, have led to confusion. Under the new and powerful impression of there being an extensive and important field of mental life which is normally withdrawn from the ego’s knowledge 
so that the processes occurring in it have to be regarded as unconscious in the truly dynamic sense, we 
have come to understand the term ‘unconscious’ in a topographical or systematic sense as well; we have 
come to speak of a ‘system’ of the preconscious and a ‘system’ of the unconscious, of a conflict between 
the ego and the system Ucs., and have used the word more and more to denote a mental province rather 
than a quality of what is mental. The discovery, act ually an inconvenient one, that portions of the ego and 
super-ego as well are unconscious in the dynamic sense, operates at this point as a relief - it makes possible the removal of a complication. We perceive that  we have no right to name the mental region that is 
foreign to the ego ‘the system Ucs’, since the characteristic of being unconscious is not restricted to it. Very 
well; we will no longer use the term ‘unconscious’ in the systematic sense and we will give what we have hitherto so described a better name and one no longer open to misunderstanding. Following a verbal usage of Nietzsche’s and taking up a suggestion by Georg Groddeck, we will in future call it the ‘id’. This 
impersonal pronoun seems particularly well suited for expressing the main characteristic of this province of 
the mind - the fact of its being alien to the ego. T he super-ego, the ego and the id - these, then, are the 
three realms, regions, provinces, into which we divide an individual’s mental apparatus, and with the mutual 
relations of which we shall be concerned in what follows. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4681  
 
 
   But first a short interpolation. I suspect that you feel dissatisfied because the three qualities of the 
characteristic of consciousness and the three province s of the mental apparatus do not fall together into 
three peaceable couples, and you may regard this as in some sense obscuring our findings. I do not think, however, that we should regret it, and we should tell ourselves that we had no right to expect any such 
smooth arrangement. Let me give you an analogy; analogies, it is true, decide nothing, but they can make 
one feel more at home. I am imagining a country with  a landscape of varying configuration - hill-country, 
plains, and chains of lakes -, and with a mixed population; it is inhabited by Germans, Magyars and Slovaks, who carry on different activities. Now things might be partitioned in such a way that the Germans, 
who breed cattle, live in the hill-country, the Magyars, who grow cereals and wine, live in the plains, and the Slovaks, who catch fish and plait reeds, live by the lakes. If the partitioning could be neat and clear-cut like 
this, a Woodrow Wilson would be delighted by it; it would also be convenient for a lecture in a geography 
lesson. The probability is, however, that you will find less orderliness and more mixing, if you travel through the region. Germans, Magyars and Slovaks live interspersed all over it; in the hill-country there is agricultural land as well, cattle are bred in the plains too.  A few things are naturally as you expected, for fish 
cannot be caught in the mountains and wine does not grow  in the water. Indeed, the picture of the region 
that you brought with you may on the whole fit the facts; but you will have to put up with deviations in the details. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4682  
 
 
   You will not expect me to have much to tell you that is new about the id apart from its new name. It is the 
dark, inaccessible part of our personality; what little we know of it we have learnt from our study of the dream-work and of the construction of neurotic symptom s, and most of that is of a negative character and 
can be described only as a contrast to the ego. We approach the id with analogies: we call it a chaos, a 
cauldron full of seething excitations. We picture it as being open at its end to somatic influences, and as 
there taking up into itself instinctual needs which find their psychical expression in it, but we cannot say in what substratum. It is filled with energy reaching it from the instincts, but it has no organization, produces 
no collective will, but only a striving to bring about the satisfaction of the instinctual needs subject to the 
observance of the pleasure principle. The logical la ws of thought do not apply in the id, and this is true 
above all of the law of contradiction. Contrary impulses exist side by side, without cancelling each other out 
or diminishing each other: at the most they may converge to form compromises under the dominating 
economic pressure towards the discharge of energy. There is nothing in the id that could be compared with negation; and we perceive with surprise an exception to the philosophical theorem that space and time are necessary forms of our mental acts. There is nothing in the id that corresponds to the idea of time; there is 
no recognition of the passage of time, and - a thing that  is most remarkable and awaits consideration in 
philosophical thought - no alteration in its mental processes is produced by the passage of time. Wishful 
impulses which have never passed beyond the id, but im pressions, too, which have been sunk into the id 
by repression, are virtually immortal; after t he passage of decades they behave as though they had just 
occurred. They can only be recognized as belonging to the past, can only lose their importance and be deprived of their cathexis of energy, when they have been made conscious by the work of analysis, and it is 
on this that the therapeutic effect of analytic treatment rests to no small extent. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4683  
 
   Again and again I have had the impression that we have made too little theoretical use of this fact, 
established beyond any doubt, of the unalterability by time of the repressed. This seems to offer an 
approach to the most profound discoveries. Nor, unfortunately, have I myself made any progress here.    The id of course knows no judgements of value: no good and evil, no morality. The economic or, if you prefer, the quantitative factor, which is intimately linked to the pleasure principle, dominates all its 
processes. Instinctual cathexes seeking discharge - that, in our view, is all there is in the id. It even seems that the energy of these instinctual impulses is in a stat e different from that in the other regions of the mind, 
far more mobile and capable of discharge; otherwise the displacements and condensations would not occur 
which are characteristic of the id and which so completely disregard the quality  of what is cathected - what 
in the ego we should call an idea. We would give much to understand more about these things! You can 
see, incidentally, that we are in a position to attribute to the id characteristics other than that of its being 
unconscious, and you can recognize the possibility of portions of the ego and super-ego being unconscious 
without possessing the same primitive and irrational characteristics.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4684  
 
   We can best arrive at the characteristics of the act ual ego, in so far as it can be distinguished from the id 
and from the super-ego, by examining its relation to the outermost superficial portion of the mental 
apparatus, which we describe as the system Pcpt.-Cs. This system is turned towards the external world, it 
is the medium for the perceptions arising thence, and during its functioning the phenomenon of 
consciousness arises in it. It is the sense-organ of the entire apparatus; moreover it is receptive not only to 
excitations from outside but also to those arising from the interior of the mind. We need scarcely look for a 
justification of the view that the ego is that porti on of the id which was modified by the proximity and 
influence of the external world, which is adapted for the reception of stimuli and as a protective shield 
against stimuli, comparable to the cortical layer by which a small piece of living substance is surrounded. 
The relation to the external world has become the decis ive factor for the ego; it has taken on the task of 
representing the external world to the id - fortunately for the id, which could not escape destruction if, in its 
blind efforts for the satisfaction of its instincts, it disregarded that supreme external power. In accomplishing 
this function, the ego must observe the external world, must lay down an accurate picture of it in the memory-traces of its perceptions, and by its exercise of the function of ‘reality-testing’ must put aside whatever in this picture of the external world is an addition derived from internal sources of excitation. The 
ego controls the approaches to motility under the id’s orders; but between a need and an action it has 
interposed a postponement in the form of the activity of thought, during which it makes use of the mnemic 
residues of experience. In that way it has dethroned t he pleasure principle which dominates the course of 
events in the id without any restriction and has replaced it by the reality principle, which promises more certainty and greater success.   
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4685  
 
   The relation to time, which is so hard to describe, is also introduced into the ego by the perceptual 
system; it can scarcely be doubted that the mode of operation of that system is what provides the origin of 
the idea of time. But what distinguishes the ego from the id quite especially is a tendency to synthesis in its 
contents, to a combination and unification in its mental processes which are totally lacking in the id. When presently we come to deal with the instincts in mental life we shall, I hope, succeed in tracing this essential 
characteristic of the ego back to its source. It alone produces the high degree of organization which the ego 
needs for its best achievements. The ego develops from per ceiving the instincts to controlling them; but this 
last is only achieved by the representative of the in stinct being allotted its proper place in a considerable 
assemblage, by its being taken up into a coherent context. To adopt a popular mode of speaking, we might say that the ego stands for reason and good sense while the id stands for the untamed passions.    So far we have allowed ourselves to be impressed by the merits and capabilities of the ego; it is now time 
to consider the other side as well. The ego is after all only a portion of the id, a portion that has been 
expediently modified by the proximity of the external world with its threat of danger. From a dynamic point 
of view it is weak, it has borrowed its energies from the id, and we are not entirely without insight into the methods - we might call them dodges - by which it extr acts further amounts of energy from the id. One such 
method, for instance, is by identifying itself with actual or abandoned objects. The object-cathexes spring from the instinctual demands of the id. The ego has in the first instance to take note of them. But by identifying itself with the object it recommends itself to the id in place of the object and seeks to divert the 
id’s libido on to itself. We have already seen that in the course of its life the ego takes into itself a large 
number of precipitates like this of former object-ca thexes. The ego must on the whole carry out the id’s 
intentions, it fulfils its task by finding out the circum stances in which those intentions can best be achieved. 
The ego’s relation to the id might be compared with that of a rider to his horse. The horse supplies the locomotive energy, while the rider has the privilege of deciding on the goal and of guiding the powerful animal’s movement. But only too often there arises between the ego and the id the not precisely ideal situation of the rider being obliged to guide the horse along the path by which it itself wants to go. 
   There is one portion of the id from which the ego has separated itself by resistances due to repression. 
But the repression is not carried over into the id: the repressed merges into the remainder of the id.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4686  
 
   We are warned by a proverb against serving two masters at the same time. The poor ego has things even 
worse: it serves three severe masters and does what it can to bring their claims and demands into harmony 
with one another. These claims are always divergent and often seem incompatible. No wonder that the ego so often fails in its task. Its three tyrannical masters are the external world, the super-ego and the id. When we follow the ego’s efforts to satisfy them simultaneously - or rather, to obey them simultaneously - we 
cannot feel any regret at having personified this ego and having set it up as a separate organism. It feels 
hemmed in on three sides, threatened by three kinds of danger, to which, if it is hard pressed, it reacts by 
generating anxiety. Owing to its origin from the exper iences of the perceptual system, it is earmarked for 
representing the demands of the external world, but it strives too to be a loyal servant of the id, to remain on good terms with it, to recommend itself to it as an object and to attract its libido to itself. In its attempts to 
mediate between the id and reality, it is often obliged to cloak the Ucs. commands of the id with its own 
Pcs. rationalizations, to conceal the id’s conflicts with reality, to profess, with diplomatic disingenuousness, 
to be taking notice of reality even when the id has remained rigid and unyielding. On the other hand it is observed at every step it takes by the strict supe r-ego, which lays down definite standards for its conduct, 
without taking any account of its difficulties from the di rection of the id and the external world, and which, if 
those standards are not obeyed, punishes it with tense feelings of inferiority and of guilt. Thus the ego, driven by the id, confined by the super-ego, repulsed by  reality, struggles to master its economic task of 
bringing about harmony among the forces and influences working in and upon it; and we can understand 
how it is that so often we cannot suppress a cry: ‘Life is not easy!’ If the ego is obliged to admit its 
weakness it breaks out in anxiety - realistic anxiety regarding the external world, moral anxiety regarding the super-ego and neurotic anxiety regarding the strength of the passions in the id. 
   I should like to portray the structural relations of the mental personality, as I have described them to you, 
in the unassuming sketch which I now present you with: 
  
 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4687  
 
   As you see here, the super-ego merges into the id; indeed, as heir to the Oedipus complex it has intimate 
relations with the id; it is more remote than the ego from the perceptual system. The id has intercourse with 
the external world only through the ego - at least, according to this diagram. It is certainly hard to say to-day how far the drawing is correct. In one respect it is undoubtedly not. The space occupied by the unconscious id ought to have been incomparably greater than that of the ego or the preconscious. I must ask you to 
correct it in your thoughts. 
    And here is another warning, to conclude these remarks, which have certainly been exacting and not, 
perhaps, very illuminating. In thinking of this division of the personality into an ego, a super-ego and an id, 
you will not, of course, have pictured sharp frontiers like the artificial ones drawn in political geography. We cannot do justice to the characteristics of the mind by linear outlines like those in a drawing or in primitive 
painting, but rather by areas of colour melting in to one another as they are presented by modern artists. 
After making the separation we must allow what we have separated to merge together once more. You 
must not judge too harshly a first attempt at giving a pictorial representations of something so intangible as psychical processes. It is highly probable that the development of these divisions is subject to great 
variations in different individuals; it is possible that  in the course of actual functioning they may change and 
go through a temporary phase of involution. Particularly in the case of what is phylogenetically the last and 
most delicate of these divisions - the differentia tion between the ego and the super-ego - something of the 
sort seems to be true. There is no question but that the same thing results from psychical illness. It is easy to imagine, too, that certain mystical practices may succeed in upsetting the normal relations between the different regions of the mind, so that, for instance, perception may be able to grasp happenings in the 
depths of the ego and in the id which were otherwise inaccessible to it. It may safely be doubted, however, 
whether this road will lead us to the ultimate truths from which salvation is to be expected. Nevertheless it may be admitted that the therapeutic efforts of psyc ho-analysis have chosen a similar line of approach. Its 
intention is, indeed, to strengthen the ego, to make it  more independent of the super-ego, to widen its field 
of perception and enlarge its organization, so that it c an appropriate fresh portions of the id. Where id was, 
there ego shall be. It is a work of culture - not unlike the draining of the Zuider Zee.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4688  
 
LECTURE XXXII 
 
ANXIETY AND INSTINCTUAL LIFE 
 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN , - You will not be surprised to hear that I have a number of novelties to report to 
you about our conception of anxiety and of the basic instincts of mental life; nor will you be surprised to 
learn that none of these novelties can claim to offer a final solution of these still unsettled problems. I have a particular reason for using the word ‘conception’ here. These are the most difficult problems that are set 
to us, but their difficulty does not lie in any insufficiency of observations; what present us with these riddles 
are actually the commonest and most familiar of phenomena. Nor does the difficulty lie in the recondite nature of the speculations to which they give rise; s peculative consideration plays little part in this sphere. 
But it is truly a matter of conceptions - that is to say, of introducing the right abstract ideas, whose application to the raw material of observation will produce order and clarity in it.     I devoted a lecture (the twenty-fifth) to anxiety in my previous series; and I must briefly recapitulate what I 
said in it. We described anxiety as an affective state - that is to say, a combination of certain feelings in the 
pleasure-unpleasure series with the corresponding inner vations of discharge and a perception of them, but 
probably also the precipitate of a particular important event, incorporated by inheritance - something that 
may thus be likened to an individually acquired hysterical attack. The event which we look upon as having 
left behind it an affective trace of this sort is the process of birth, at the time of which the effects upon the heart’s action and upon respiration characteristic of anxiety were expedient ones. The very first anxiety 
would thus have been a toxic one. We then started off from a distinction between realistic anxiety and 
neurotic anxiety, of which the former was a reaction, which seemed intelligible to us, to a danger - that is, to an expected injury from outside - while the latter was completely enigmatic, and appeared to be pointless.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4689  
 
   In an analysis of realistic anxiety we brought it down to the state of increased sensory attention and motor 
tension which we describe as ‘preparedness for anxiety’. It is out of this that the anxiety reaction develops. 
Here two outcomes are possible. Either the generation of anxiety - the repetition of the old traumatic 
experience - is limited to a signal, in which case the remainder of the reaction can adapt itself to the new situation of danger and can proceed to flight or defenc e; or the old situation can retain the upper hand and 
the total reaction may consist in no more than a generat ion of anxiety, in which case the affective state 
becomes paralysing and will be inexpedient for present purposes.    We then turned to neurotic anxiety and pointed out that we observe it under three conditions. We find it 
first as a freely floating, general apprehensiveness, ready to attach itself temporarily, in the form of what is 
known as ‘expectant anxiety’, to any possibility that may freshly arise - as happens, for instance, in a typical anxiety neurosis. Secondly, we find it firmly attached to ce rtain ideas in the so-called ‘phobias’, in which it is 
still possible to recognize a relation to external danger but in which we must judge the fear exaggerated out of all proportion. Thirdly and lastly, we find anxiety in hysteria and other forms of severe neurosis, where it either accompanies symptoms or emerges independently as an attack or more persistent state, but always without any visible basis in an external danger. We then asked ourselves two questions: ‘What are people 
afraid of in neurotic anxiety?’ and ‘How are we to bring it into relation with realistic anxiety felt in the face of 
external dangers?’    Our investigations were far from remaining unsuccessful: we reached a few important conclusions. In 
regard to anxious expectation clinical experience reveal ed that it had a regular connection with the libidinal 
economics of sexual life. The commonest cause of anxiety neurosis is unconsummated excitation. Libidinal 
excitation is aroused but not satisfied, not employed; apprehensiveness then appears instead of this libido 
that has been diverted from its employment. I even thought I was justified in saying that this unsatisfied 
libido was directly changed into anxiety. This view found support in some quite regularly occurring phobias of small children. Many of these phobias are very puzzling to us, but others, such as the fear of being alone and the fear of strangers, can be explained with certainty. Loneliness as well as a strange face arouse the 
child’s longing for his familiar mother; he is unable to control this libidinal excitation, he cannot hold it in 
suspense but changes it into anxiety. This infantile anxie ty must therefore be regarded not as of the realistic 
but as of the neurotic kind. Infantile phobias and the ex pectation of anxiety in anxiety neurosis offer us two 
examples of one way in which neurotic anxiety originates : by a direct transformation of libido. We shall at 
once come to know of a second mechanism, but it will turn out not to be very different from the first.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4690  
 
   For we consider that what is responsible for the anxiety in hysteria and other neuroses is the process of 
repression. We believe it is possible to give a more complete account of this than before, if we separate 
what happens to the idea that has to be repressed from what happens to the quota of libido attaching to it. It is the idea which is subjected to repression and which may be distorted to the point of being unrecognizable; but its quota of affect is regularly tr ansformed into anxiety - and this is so whatever the 
nature of the affect may be, whether it is aggressiveness or love. It makes no essential difference, then, for what reason a quota of libido has become unemployable: w hether it is on account of the infantile weakness 
of the ego, as in children’s phobias, or on account of somatic processes in sexual life, as in anxiety 
neurosis, or owing to repression, as in hysteria. Thus in reality the two mechanisms that bring about 
neurotic anxiety coincide.    In the course of these investigations our attention was drawn to a highly significant relation between the 
generation of anxiety and the formation of symptoms - namely, that these two represent and replace each 
other. For instance, an agoraphobic patient may start his illness with an attack of anxiety in the street. This would be repeated every time he went into the street again. He will now develop the symptom of agoraphobia; this may also be described as an inhibition, a restriction of the ego’s functioning, and by 
means of it he spares himself anxiety attacks. We can witness the converse of this if we interfere in the 
formation of symptoms, as is possible, for instance, with obsessions. If we prevent a patient from carrying out a washing ceremonial, he falls into a state of anxiety which he finds hard to tolerate and from which he 
had evidently been protected by his symptom. And it seems, indeed, that the generation of anxiety is the 
earlier and the formation of symptoms the later of the two, as though the symptoms are created in order to avoid the outbreak of the anxiety state. This is confir med too by the fact that the first neuroses of childhood 
are phobias - states in which we see so clearly how an initial generation of anxiety is replaced by the later formation of a symptom; we get an impression that it is from these interrelations that we shall best obtain access to an understanding of neurotic anxiety. And at the same time we have also succeeded in answering the question of what it is that a person is af raid of in neurotic anxiety and so in establishing the 
connection between neurotic and realistic anxiety. What he is afraid of is evidently his own libido. The 
difference between this situation and that of realistic anxiety lies in two points: that the danger is an internal instead of an external one and that it is not consciously recognized. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4691  
 
   In phobias it is very easy to observe the way in which this internal danger is transformed into an external 
one - that is to say, how a neurotic anxiety is changed into an apparently realistic one. In order to simplify 
what is often a very complicated business, let us suppose that the agoraphobic patient is invariably afraid of feelings of temptation that are aroused in him by meeting people in the street. In his phobia he brings about a displacement and henceforward is afraid of an external situation. What he gains by this is obviously that 
he thinks he will be able to protect himself better in that way. One can save oneself from an external danger by flight; fleeing from an internal danger is a difficult enterprise.    At the conclusion of my earlier lecture on anxiety I myself expressed the opinion that, although these 
various findings of our enquiry were not mutually contradictory, somehow they did not fit in with one 
another. Anxiety, it seems, in so far as it is an a ffective state, is the reproduction of an old event which 
brought a threat of danger; anxiety serves the purposes  of self-preservation and is a signal of a new 
danger; it arises from libido that has in some way become unemployable and it also arises during the process of repression; it is replaced by the formation of a symptom, is, as it were, psychically bound - one has a feeling that something is missing here which would bring all these pieces together into a whole.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4692  
 
 
   Ladies and Gentlemen, the dissection of the mental personality into a super-ego, an ego and an id, which 
I put before you in my last lecture, has obliged us to take our bearings afresh in the problem of anxiety as well. With the thesis that the ego is the sole s eat of anxiety - that the ego alone can produce and feel 
anxiety - we have established a new and stable position from which a number of things take on a new 
aspect. And indeed it is difficult to see what sense there would be in speaking of an ‘anxiety of the id’ or in 
attributing a capacity for apprehensiveness to the super-ego. On the other hand, we have welcomed a 
desirable element of correspondence in the fact that the three main species of anxiety, realistic, neurotic 
and moral, can be so easily connected with the ego’s three dependent relations - to the external world, to the id and to the super-ego. Along with this new view, moreover, the function of anxiety as a signal announcing a situation of danger (a notion, incidentally, not unfamiliar to us) comes into prominence, the 
question of what the material is out of which anxiety is made loses interest, and the relations between 
realistic and neurotic anxiety have become surprisingly clarified and simplified. It is also to be remarked that we now understand the apparently complicated cases of the generation of anxiety better than those which 
were considered simple. 
   For we have recently been examining the way in which anxiety is generated in certain phobias which we 
class as anxiety hysteria, and have chosen cases in which we were dealing with the typical repression of wishful impulses arising from the Oedipus complex. We should have expected to find that it was a libidinal 
cathexis of the boy’s mother as object which, as  a result of repression, had been changed into anxiety and 
which now emerged, expressed in symptomatic terms, attached to a substitute for his father. I cannot 
present you with the detailed steps of an investigation such as this; it will be enough to say that the 
surprising result was the opposite of what we expect ed. It was not the repression that created the anxiety; 
the anxiety was there earlier; it was the anxiety that made the repression. But what sort of anxiety can it 
have been? Only anxiety in the face of a threatening external danger - that is to say, a realistic anxiety. It is true that the boy felt anxiety in the face of a demand by his libido - in this instance, anxiety at being in love 
with his mother; so the case was in fact one of neurotic anxiety. But this being in love only appeared to him 
as an internal danger, which he must avoid by renouncing that object, because it conjured up an external situation of danger. And in every case we examine we obtain the same result. It must be confessed that we 
were not prepared to find that internal instinctual danger would turn out to be a determinant and preparation 
for an external, real, situation of danger.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4693  
 
   But we have not made any mention at all so far of what the real danger is that the child is afraid of as a 
result of being in love with his mother. The danger is the punishment of being castrated, of losing his genital 
organ. You will of course object that after all that is not a real danger. Our boys are not castrated because they are in love with their mothers during the phase of the Oedipus complex. But the matter cannot be dismissed so simply. Above all, it is not a question of whether castration is really carried out; what is 
decisive is that the danger is one that threatens from outside and that the child believes in it. He has some 
ground for this, for people threaten him often enough with cutting off his penis during the phallic phase, at 
the time of his early masturbation, and hints at that punishment must regularly find a phylogenetic 
reinforcement in him. It is our suspicion that during the human family’s primaeval period castration used 
actually to be carried out by a jealous and cruel father upon growing boys, and that circumcision, which so frequently plays a part in puberty rites among primitive peoples, is a clearly recognizable relic of it. We are 
aware that here we are diverging widely from the general opinion; but we must hold fast to the view that 
fear of castration is one of the commonest and strongest motives for repression and thus for the formation of neuroses. The analysis of cases in which circumcision, though not, it is true, castration, has been carried out on boys as a cure or punishment for masturbation (a far from rare occurrence in Anglo-American 
society) has given our conviction a last degree of certainty. It is very tempting at this point to go more 
deeply into the castration complex, but I will stick to our subject.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4694  
 
   Fear of castration is not, of course, the only motive for repression: indeed, it finds no place in women, for 
though they have a castration complex they cannot have a f ear of being castrated. Its place is taken in their 
sex by a fear of loss of love, which is evidently a later prolongation of the infant’s anxiety if it finds its mother 
absent. You will realize how real a situation of danger is indicated by this anxiety. If a mother is absent or has withdrawn her love from her child, it is no longer sure of the satisfaction of its needs and is perhaps 
exposed to the most distressing feelings of tension. Do not reject the idea that these determinants of 
anxiety may at bottom repeat the situation of the original anxiety at birth, which, to be sure, also represented a separation from the mother. Indeed, if you follow a train of thought suggested by Ferenczi, 
you may add the fear of castration to this series, for a loss of the male organ results in an inability to unite 
once more with the mother (or a substitute for her) in the sexual act. I may mention to you incidentally that the very frequent phantasy of returning into the mother’s womb is a substitute for this wish to copulate. 
There would be many interesting things and surprising connections to tell you at this point, but I cannot go 
outside the framework of an introduction to psycho-analysis. I will only draw your attention to the fact that here psychological researches trench upon the facts of biology.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4695  
 
   Otto Rank, to whom psycho-analysis is indebted for many excellent contributions, also has the merit of 
having expressly emphasized the significance of the act of birth and of separation from the mother. 
Nevertheless we have all found it impossible to accept the extreme inferences which he has drawn from 
this factor as bearing on the theory of the neuroses and even on analytic therapy. The core of his theory - that the experience of anxiety at birth is the model of  all later situations of danger - he found already there. 
If we dwell on these situations of danger for a moment, we can say that in fact a particular determinant of anxiety (that is, situation of danger) is allotted to every age of development as being appropriate to it. The danger of psychical helplessness fits the stage of the ego’s early immaturity; the danger of loss of an object 
(or loss of love) fits the lack of self-sufficiency in the first years of childhood; the danger of being castrated 
fits the phallic phase; and finally fear of the super-ego, which assumes a special position, fits the period of latency. In the course of development the old determinants of anxiety should be dropped, since the 
situations of danger corresponding to them have lost their importance owing to the strengthening of the 
ego. But this only occurs most incompletely. Many people are unable to surmount the fear of loss of love; they never become sufficiently independent of other people’s love and in this respect carry on their behaviour as infants. Fear of the super-ego should nor mally never cease, since, in the form of moral 
anxiety, it is indispensable in social relations, and only in the rarest cases can an individual become independent of human society. A few of the old situations of danger, too, succeed in surviving into later periods by making contemporary modifications in t heir determinants of anxiety. Thus, for instance, the 
danger of castration persists under the mark of syphilidophobia. It is true that as an adult one knows that castration is no longer customary as a punishment for the indulgence of sexual desires, but on the other hand one has learnt that instinctual liberty of that ki nd is threatened by serious diseases. There is no doubt 
that the people we describe as neurotics remain infantile in their attitude to danger and have not surmounted obsolete determinants of anxiety. We may take this as a factual contribution to the characterization of neurotics; it is not so easy to say why it should be so.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4696  
 
   I hope you have not lost the thread of what I am saying and remember that we are investigating the 
relations between anxiety and repression. In the course of this we have learnt two new things: first, that 
anxiety makes repression and not, as we used to think, the other way round, and that the instinctual situation which is feared goes back ultimately to an external situation of danger. The next question will be: how do we now picture the process of a repression under the influence of anxiety? The answer will, I think, 
be as follows. The ego notices that the satisfacti on of an emerging instinctual demand would conjure up 
one of the well-remembered situations of danger. This instinctual cathexis must therefore be somehow 
suppressed, stopped, made powerless. We know that t he ego succeeds in this task if it is strong and has 
drawn the instinctual impulse concerned into its organization. But what happens in the case of repression is 
that the instinctual impulse still belongs to the id and that the ego feels weak. The ego thereupon helps itself by a technique which is at bottom identical with normal thinking. Thinking is an experimental action 
carried out with small amounts of energy, in the same way as a general shifts small figures about on a map 
before setting his large bodies of troops in motion. Thus the ego anticipates the satisfaction of the questionable instinctual impulse and permits it to bri ng about the reproduction of the unpleasurable feelings 
at the beginning of the feared situation of danger. With this the automatism of the pleasure-unpleasure 
principle is brought into operation and now carries out the repression of the dangerous instinctual impulse. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4697  
 
   ‘Stop a moment!’ you will exclaim; ‘we can’t follow you any further there!’ You are quite right; I must add a 
little more before it can seem acceptable to you. First, I must admit that I have tried to translate into the 
language of our normal thinking what must in fact be a process that is neither conscious nor preconscious, taking place between quotas of energy in some unimagi nable substratum. But that is not a strong objection, 
for it cannot be done in any other way. What is more important is that we should distinguish clearly what 
happens in the ego and what happens in the id when there is a repression. We have just said what the ego 
does: it makes use of an experimental cathexis and starts up the pleasure-unpleasure automatism by 
means of a signal of anxiety. After that, several reactions are possible or a combination of them in varying 
proportions. Either the anxiety attack is fully generated and the ego withdraws entirely from the 
objectionable excitation; or, in place of the experimental cathexis it opposes the excitation with an anticathexis, and this combines with the energy of the repressed impulse to form a symptom; or the 
anticathexis is taken up into the ego as a reaction-formation, as an intensification of certain of the ego’s 
dispositions, as a permanent alteration of it. The more the generation of anxiety can be restricted to a mere signal, so much the more does the ego expend on actions of defence which amount to the psychical binding of the repressed, and so much the closer, too, does the process approximate to a normal working-
over of it, though no doubt without attaining to it. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4698  
 
   Incidentally, here is a point on which we may dwell for a moment. You yourselves have no doubt 
assumed that what is known as ‘character’, a thing so hard to define, is to be ascribed entirely to the ego. 
We have already made out a little of what it is that  creates character. First and foremost there is the 
incorporation of the former parental agency as a super-ego, which is no doubt its most important and decisive portion, and, further, identifications with the two parents of the later period and with other influential 
figures, and similar identifications formed as prec ipitates of abandoned object-relations. And we may now 
add as contributions to the construction of character which are never absent the reaction-formations which 
the ego acquires - to begin with in making its repressions and later, by a more normal method, when it 
rejects unwished-for instinctual impulses. 
   Now let us go back and turn to the id. It is not so easy to guess what occurs during repression in connection with the instinctual impulse that is being fought against. The main question which our interest 
raises is as to what happens to the energy, to the libidinal charge, of that excitation - how is it employed? 
You recollect that the earlier hypothesis was that it is precisely this that is transformed by repression into anxiety. We no longer feel able to say that. The modest reply will rather be that what happens to it is probably not always the same thing. There is probably an intimate correspondence which we ought to get 
to know about between what is occurring at the time in the ego and in the id in connection with the 
repressed impulse. For since we have decided that the pleasure-unpleasure principle, which is set in action by the signal of anxiety, plays a part in repression, we must alter our expectations. That principle exercises 
an entirely unrestricted dominance over what happens in the id. We can rely on its bringing about quite 
profound changes in the instinctual impulse in question. We are prepared to find that repression will have very various consequences, more or less far-reaching. In some cases the repressed instinctual impulse 
may retain its libidinal cathexis, and may persist in the id unchanged, although subject to constant pressure 
from the ego. In other cases what seems to happen is that it is totally destroyed, while its libido is permanently diverted along other paths. I expressed the view that this is what happens when the Oedipus complex is dealt with normally - in this desirable case, therefore, being not simply repressed but destroyed 
in the id. Clinical experience has further shown us that in many cases, instead of the customary result of 
repression, a degradation of the libido takes place - a regression of the libidinal organization to an earlier stage. This can, of course, only occur in the id, and if it occurs it will be under the influence of the same 
conflict which was introduced by the signal of anxiety. T he most striking example of this kind is provided by 
the obsessional neurosis, in which libidinal regression and repression operate together. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4699  
 
   I fear, Ladies and Gentlemen, that you will find this exposition hard to follow, and you will guess that I 
have not stated it exhaustively. I am sorry to have had to rouse your displeasure. But I can set myself no 
other aim than to give you an impression of the nature of our findings and of the difficulties involved in working them out. The deeper we penetrate into the study of mental processes the more we recognize their abundance and complexity. A number of simple formulas which to begin with seemed to meet our needs 
have later turned out to be inadequate. We do not tire of altering and improving them. In my lecture on the 
theory of dreams I introduced you to a region in which for fifteen years there has scarcely been a new discovery. Here, where we are dealing with anxiety, you see everything in a state of flux and change. These 
novelties, moreover, have not yet been thoroughly worked through and perhaps this too adds to the 
difficulties of demonstrating them. But have patience! We shall soon be able to take leave of the subject of anxiety. I cannot promise that it will have been settled to our satisfaction, but it is to be hoped that we shall 
have made a little bit of progress. And in the meantime we have made all sorts of new discoveries. Now, for instance, our study of anxiety leads us to add a new f eature to our description of the ego. We have said that 
the ego is weak in comparison with the id, that it is its loyal servant, eager to carry out its orders and to fulfil its demands. We have no intention of withdrawing this statement. But on the other hand this same ego is 
the better organized part of the id, with its face turned towards reality. We must not exaggerate the 
separation between the two of them too much, and we mu st not be surprised if the ego on its part can bring 
its influence to bear on the processes in the id. I believe the ego exercises this influence by putting into 
action the almost omnipotent pleasure-unpleasure principl e by means of the signal of anxiety. On the other 
hand, it shows its weakness again immediately afterwards, for by the act of repression it renounces a 
portion of its organization and has to allow the repressed instinctual impulse to remain permanently 
withdrawn from its influence. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4700  
 
   And now, only one more remark on the problem of anxiety. Neurotic anxiety has changed in our hands 
into realistic anxiety, into fear of particular external situations of danger. But we cannot stop there, we must 
take another step - though it will be a step backward. We a sk ourselves what it is that is actually dangerous 
and actually feared in a situation of danger of this kind.  It is plainly not the injury to the subject as judged 
objectively, for this need be of no significance psychologically, but something brought about by it in the 
mind. Birth, for instance, our model for an anxiety state, can after all scarcely be regarded on its own 
account as an injury, although it may involve a danger of  injuries. The essential thing about birth, as about 
every situation of danger, is that it calls up in mental experience a state of highly tense excitation, which is 
felt as unpleasure and which one is not able to master by  discharging it. Let us call a state of this kind, 
before which the efforts of the pleasure principle break down, a ‘traumatic’ moment. Then, if we take in succession neurotic anxiety, realistic anxiety and the situation of danger, we arrive at this simple 
proposition: what is feared, what is the object of the anxiety, is invariably the emergence of a traumatic 
moment, which cannot be dealt with by the normal rules of the pleasure principle. We understand at once 
that our endowment with the pleasure principle does not guarantee us against objective injuries but only against a particular injury to our psychical economics. It is a long step from the pleasure principle to the 
self-preservative instinct; the intentions of the two of them are very far from coinciding from the start. But we 
see something else besides; perhaps it is the solution we are in search of. Namely, that in all this it is a question of relative quantities. It is only the magnitude of the sum of excitation that turns an impression into 
a traumatic moment, paralyses the function of the pleasure principle and gives the situation of danger its 
significance. And if that is how things are, if thes e puzzles can be solved so prosaically, why should it not 
be possible for similar traumatic moments to arise in mental life without reference to hypothetical situations 
of danger - traumatic moments, then, in which anxiety  is not aroused as a signal but is generated anew for 
a fresh reason. Clinical experience declares decidedly that such is in fact the case. It is only the later 
repressions that exhibit the mechanism we have descr ibed, in which anxiety is awakened as a signal of an 
earlier situation of danger. The first and original repressions arise directly from traumatic moments, when the ego meets with an excessively great libidinal demand; they construct their anxiety afresh, although, it is 
true, on the model of birth. The same may apply to the generation of anxiety in anxiety neurosis owing to 
somatic damage to the sexual function. We shall no longer maintain that it is the libido itself that is turned 
into anxiety in such cases. But I can see no objection to there being a twofold origin of anxiety - one as a 
direct consequence of the traumatic moment and the ot her as a signal threatening a repetition of such a 
moment. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4701  
 
 
   I feel sure you are rejoicing, Ladies and Gentlemen,  at not having to listen to any more about anxiety. But 
you have gained nothing by it: what follows is no better. It is my design to introduce you to-day as well to 
the field of the libido theory or theory of the instincts, where there have equally been a number of new developments. I will not claim that we have made great advances in it, so that it would be worth your taking 
any amount of trouble to learn about them. No. This is a region in which we are struggling laboriously to find 
our bearings and make discoveries; you will only be witnesses of our efforts. Here too I shall have to go back to some of the things I told you earlier. 
   The theory of the instincts is so to say our mythology. Instincts are mythical entities, magnificent in their 
indefiniteness. In our work we cannot for a moment disregard them, yet we are never sure that we are seeing them clearly. You know how popular thinking deals with the instincts. People assume as many and 
as various instincts as they happen to need at the moment  - a self-assertive instinct, an imitative instinct, an 
instinct of play, a gregarious instinct and many others like them. People take them up, as it were, make 
each of them do its particular job, and then drop them again. We have always been moved by a suspicion that behind all these little ad hoc  instincts there lay concealed something serious and powerful which we 
should like to approach cautiously. Our first step was modest enough. We told ourselves we should probably not be going astray if we began by separating two main instincts or classes of instincts or groups of instincts in accordance with the two great needs - hunger and love. However jealously we usually defend 
the independence of psychology from every other scienc e, here we stood in the shadow of the unshakable 
biological fact that the living individual organism is at the command of two intentions, self-preservation and 
the preservation of the species, which seem to be i ndependent of each other, which, so far as we know at 
present, have no common origin and whose interests are often in conflict in animal life. Actually what we 
are talking now is biological psychology, we are studying the psychical accompaniments of biological processes. It was as representing this aspect of the subject that the ‘ego-instincts’ and the ‘sexual instincts’ were introduced into psycho-analysis. We included in the former everything that had to do with the 
preservation, assertion and magnification of the individual. To the latter we had to attribute the copiousness 
called for by infantile and perverse sexual life. In the course of investigating the neuroses we came to know the ego as the restricting and repressing power and the sexual trends as the restricted and repressed one; 
we therefore believed that we had clear evidence not  only of the difference between the two groups of 
instincts but also of the conflict between them. The first object of our study was only the sexual instincts, 
whose energy we named ‘libido’. It was in relation to them that we sought to clarify our ideas of what an 
instinct is and what is to be attributed to it. Here we have the libido theory. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4702  
 
   An instinct, then, is distinguished from a stimulus by  the fact that it arises from sources of stimulation 
within the body, that it operates as a constant force and that the subject cannot avoid it by flight, as is 
possible with an external stimulus. We can distinguish an instinct’s source, object and aim. Its source is a state of excitation in the body, its aim is the removal of that excitation; on its path from its source to its aim the instinct becomes operative psychically. We picture it as a certain quota of energy which presses in a 
particular direction. It is from this pressing that it derives its name of ‘ Trieb’. People speak of ‘active’ and 
‘passive’ instincts, but it would be more correct to speak of instincts with active and passive aims: for an 
expenditure of activity is needed to achieve a passive ai m as well. The aim can be achieved in the subject’s 
own body; as a rule an external object is brought in, in r egard to which the instinct achieves its external aim; 
its internal aim invariably remains the bodily change which is felt as satisfaction. It has not become clear to us whether the relation of the instinct to its somatic source gives it a specific quality and if so what. The 
evidence of analytic experience shows that it is an undoubted fact that instinctual impulses from one source 
attach themselves to those from other sources and share their further vicissitudes and that in general one 
instinctual satisfaction can be replaced by another. But it must be admitted that we do not understand this very well. The relations of an instinct to its aim and object are also open to alterations; both can be 
exchanged for other ones, though its relation to its object is nevertheless the more easily loosened. A 
certain kind of modification of the aim and change of the object, in which our social valuation is taken into account, is described by us as ‘sublimation’. Besides this, we have grounds for distinguishing instincts 
which are ‘inhibited in their aim’ - instinctual impulses from sources well known to us with an unambiguous 
aim, but which come to a stop on their way to satisfaction, so that a lasting object-cathexis comes about and a permanent trend. Such, for instance, is the relation of tenderness, which undoubtedly originates from 
the sources of sexual need and invariably renounces its satisfaction. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4703  
 
   You see how many of the characteristics and vicissitudes of the instincts still escape our comprehension. 
A further distinction should be mentioned here which is  exhibited between the sexual and self-preservative 
instincts and which would be of the greatest theoretical importance if it applied to the groups as a whole. 
The sexual instincts are noticeable to us for their plasticity, their capacity for altering their aims, their replaceability, which admits of one instinctual satisfaction being replaced by another, and their readiness for 
being deferred, of which we have just given a good exam ple in the aim-inhibited instincts. We should be 
glad to deny these characteristics to the self-preservative instincts, and to say of them that they are 
inflexible, admit of no delay, are imperative in a very different sense and have a quite other relation to 
repression and to anxiety. But a little reflection tells us that this exceptional position applies, not to all the 
ego-instincts, but only to hunger and thirst, and is evident ly based on a peculiar character of the sources of 
those instincts. A good part of the confusing impression made by all this is that we have not given separate 
consideration to the alterations which the influence of the organized ego makes in the instinctual impulses that belonged originally to the id.    We find ourselves on firmer ground when we investigate the manner in which the life of the instincts serves the sexual function. Here we have acquired qui te definite knowledge, with which you too are already 
familiar. It is not the case, then, that we recognize a sexual instinct which is from the first the vehicle of an urge towards the aim of the sexual function - the union of the two sex-cells. What we see is a great number of component instincts arising from different areas and regions of the body, which strive for satisfaction 
fairly independently of one another and find that satisfaction in something that we may call ‘organ-pleasure’. 
The genitals are the latest of these ‘erotogenic z ones’ and the name of ‘sexual’ pleasure cannot be withheld 
from their organ-pleasure. These impulses which strive for pleasure are not all taken up into the final 
organization of the sexual function. A number of them are set aside as unserviceable, by repression or 
some other means; a few of them are diverted from their aim in the remarkable manner I have mentioned and used to strengthen other impulses; yet others persist in minor roles, and serve for the performance of introductory acts, for the production of fore-pleasure. You have heard how in the course of this long-drawn-
out development several phases of preliminary organization can be recognized and also how this history of the sexual function explains its aberrations and atrophies . The first of these ‘pregenital’ phases is known to 
us as the oral one because, in conformity with the way in which an infant in arms is nourished, the 
erotogenic zone of the mouth dominates what may be called the sexual activity of that period of life. At a 
second level the sadistic  and anal impulses come to the fore, undoubtedly in connection with the 
appearance of the teeth, the strengthening of the mu scular apparatus and the control of the sphincter 
functions. We have learnt a number of interesting details about this remarkable stage of development in particular. Thirdly comes the phallic  phase in which in both sexes the male organ (and what corresponds to 
it in girls) attains an importance which can no longer be overlooked. We have reserved the name of genital  
phase for the definitive sexual organization which is established after puberty and in which the female genital organ for the first time meets with the recognition which the male one acquired long before.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4704  
 
   So far all this is trite repetition. And you must not suppose that the many things I have not mentioned this 
time no longer hold good. This repetition was necessary so that I might use it as the starting-point for a 
report on the advances in our knowledge. We can boast of having learnt much that is new, particularly about the early organizations of the libido, and of having obtained a clearer grasp of the significance of what is old; and I will give you at least a few examples to demonstrate this. Abraham showed in 1924 that 
two stages can be distinguished in the sadistic-anal phase. The earlier of these is dominated by the 
destructive trends of destroying and losing, the later one by trends friendly towards objects - those of keeping and possessing. It is in the middle of this phase, therefore, that consideration for the object makes 
its first appearance as a precursor of a later erotic cathexis. We are equally justified in making a similar 
subdivision in the first, oral phase. In the first sub-stage what is in question is only oral incorporation, there is no ambivalence at all in the relation to the objec t - the mother’s breast. The second stage, characterized 
by the emergence of the biting activity, may be described as the ‘oral-sadistic’ one; it exhibits for the first time the phenomena of ambivalence, which become so much clearer afterwards, in the following sadistic-anal phase. The value of these new distinctions is to be seen especially if we look for the dispositional points in the development of the libido in the case of particular neuroses, such as obsessional neurosis or 
melancholia. You must here recall to mind what we have learnt about the connection between fixation of 
the libido, disposition and regression.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4705  
 
   Our attitude to the phases of the organization of the libido has in general shifted a little. Whereas earlier 
we chiefly emphasized the way in which each of them passed away before the next, our attention now is 
directed to the facts that show us how much of each earlier phase persists alongside of and behind the later configurations and obtains a permanent representation in the libidinal economy and character of the subject. Still more significant have studies become which have taught us how frequently under pathological 
conditions regressions to earlier phases occur and that particular regressions are characteristic of particular 
forms of illness. But I cannot go into that here, it forms part of the specialized psychology of the neuroses.    We have been able to study transformations of instinct and similar processes particularly in anal erotism, 
the excitations arising from the sources of the erotogenic anal zone, and we were surprised at the 
multiplicity of uses to which these instinctual impulses are put. It may not be easy, perhaps, to get free from the contempt into which this particular zone has fallen in the course of evolution. Let us therefore allow 
ourselves to be reminded by Abraham that embryologi cally the anus corresponds to the primitive mouth, 
which has migrated down to the end of the bowel. We hav e learnt, then, that after a person’s own faeces, 
his excrement, has lost its value for him, this instinctual interest derived from the anal source passes over on to objects that can be presented as gifts. And this is rightly so, for faeces were the first gift that an infant 
could make, something he could part with out of love for whoever was looking after him. After this, corresponding exactly to analogous changes of meaning that  occur in linguistic development, this ancient 
interest in faeces is transformed into the high valuation of gold and money  but also makes a contribution to 
the affective cathexis of baby  and penis . It is a universal conviction among children, who long retain the 
cloaca theory, that babies are born from the bowel like a piece of faeces: defaecation is the model of the 
act of birth. But the penis too has its fore-runner in the column of faeces which fills and stimulates the 
mucous membrane of the bowel. When a child, unwillingly enough, comes to realize that there are human creatures who do not possess a penis, that organ appears to him as something detachable from the body and becomes unmistakably analogous to the excrement, which was the first piece of bodily material that had to be renounced. A great part of anal erotism is thus carried over into a cathexis of the penis. But the 
interest in that part of the body has, in addition to its anal-erotic root, an oral one which is perhaps more powerful still: for when sucking has come to an end, the penis also becomes heir of the mother’s nipple.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4706  
 
   If one is not aware of these profound connections, it is impossible to find one’s way about in the 
phantasies of human beings, in their associations, infl uenced as they are by the unconscious, and in their 
symptomatic language. Faeces - money - gift - baby - penis are treated there as though they meant the 
same thing, and they are represented too by the same  symbols. Nor must you forget that I have only been 
able to give you very incomplete information. I may hurriedly add, perhaps, that interest in the vagina, which awakens later, is also essentially of anal-erotic origin. This is not to be wondered at, for the vagina itself, to 
borrow an apt phrase from Lou Andreas-Salomé, is ‘t aken on lease’ from the rectum: in the life of 
homosexuals, who have failed to accomplish some part of normal sexual development, the vagina is once 
more represented by it. In dreams a locality often appears which was earlier a simple room but is now 
divided into two by a wall, or the other way round. This always means the relation of the vagina to the bowel. It is also easy to follow the way in which in girls what is an entirely unfeminine wish to possess a 
penis is normally transformed into a wish for a baby, and then for a man as the bearer of the penis and 
giver of the baby; so that here we can see too how a portion of what was originally anal-erotic interest obtains admission into the later genital organization.    During our studies of the pregenital phases of the libido we have also gained a few fresh insights into the 
formation of character. We noticed a triad of character-traits which are found together with fair regularity: 
orderliness, parsimoniousness and obstinacy; and we inferred from the analysis of people exhibiting these traits that they have arisen from their anal erotis m becoming absorbed and employed in a different way. We 
therefore speak of an ‘anal character’ in which we fi nd this remarkable combination and we draw a contrast 
to some extent between the anal character and unmodified anal erotism. We also discovered a similar but perhaps still firmer link between ambition and urethral erotism. A striking allusion to this connection is to be 
seen in the legend that Alexander the Great was born during the same night in which a certain Herostratus 
set fire to the celebrated temple of Artemis at Ephesus out of a sheer desire for fame. So the ancients would seem not to have been unaware of the connection. You know, of course, how much urination has to 
do with fire and extinguishing fire. We naturally expect that other character traits as well will turn out 
similarly to be precipitates or reaction-formations related to particular pregenital libidinal structures; but we 
have not yet been able to show this.  
   It is now time, however, for me to go back both in history and in my subject-matter and once more to take 
up the most general problems of instinctual life. To begin with, the opposition between the ego-instincts and the sexual instincts lay at the base of our libido theory. When later on we began to study the ego itself more 
closely and arrived at the conception of narcissism, this distinction itself lost its foundation. In rare cases 
one can observe that the ego has taken itself as an object and is behaving as though it were in love with itself. Hence the term ‘narcissism’, borrowed from the Greek myth. But that is only an extreme exaggeration 
of a normal state of affairs. We came to understand that the ego is always the main reservoir of libido, from 
which libidinal cathexes of objects go out and into which they return again, while the major part of this libido remains permanently in the ego. Thus ego-libido is being constantly changed into object-libido and object-libido into ego-libido. But in that case they could not  be different in their nature and it could have no sense 
to distinguish the energy of the one from the energy of the other; we could either drop the term ‘libido’ or use it as synonymous with psychical energy in general.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4707  
 
   We did not maintain this position for long. Our feeling of their being a contrariety in instinctual life soon 
found another and sharper expression. It is not my wish, however, to put before you the origin of this 
novelty in the theory of the instincts; it too is based essentially on biological considerations. I shall offer it to you as a ready-made product. Our hypothesis is that there are two essentially different classes of instincts: 
the sexual instincts, understood in the widest sense - Eros, if you prefer that name - and the aggressive 
instincts, whose aim is destruction. When it is put to you like this, you will scarcely regard it as a novelty. It looks like an attempt at a theoretical transfigur ation of the commonplace opposition between loving and 
hating, which coincides, perhaps, with the other polarity, of attraction and repulsion, which physics assumes 
in the inorganic world. But it is a remarkable thing t hat this hypothesis is nevertheless felt by many people 
as an innovation and, indeed, as a most undesirable one wh ich should be got rid of as quickly as possible. I 
presume that a strong affective factor is coming into effect in this rejection. Why have we ourselves needed such a long time before we decided to recognize an aggressive instinct? Why did we hesitate to make use, 
on behalf of our theory, of facts which were obvious and familiar to everyone? We should probably have met with little resistance if we had wanted to ascribe an instinct with such an aim to animals. But to include it in the human constitution appears sacrilegious; it contradicts too many religious presumptions and social 
conventions. No, man must be naturally good or at least good-natured. If he occasionally shows himself 
brutal, violent or cruel, these are only passing disturbances of his emotional life, for the most part provoked, or perhaps only consequences of the inexpedient soci al regulations which he has hitherto imposed on 
himself.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4708  
 
   Unfortunately what history tells us and what we ourselves have experienced does not speak in this sense 
but rather justifies a judgement that belief in the ‘ goodness’ of human nature is one of those evil illusions by 
which mankind expect their lives to be beautified and m ade easier while in reality they only cause damage. 
We need not continue this controversy, since we have argued in favour of a special aggressive and 
destructive instinct in men not on account of the teachi ngs of history or of our experience in life but on the 
basis of general considerations to which we were led by examining the phenomena of sadism and 
masochism. As you know, we call it sadism when sexual  satisfaction is linked to the condition of the sexual 
object’s suffering pain, ill-treatment and humiliation, and masochism when the need is felt of being the ill-
treated object oneself. As you know too, a certain admixture of these two trends is included in normal 
sexual relations, and we speak of perversions when t hey push the other sexual aims into the background 
and replace them by their own aims. And you will scarcely have failed to notice that sadism has a more 
intimate relation with masculinity and masochism with femininity, as though there were a secret kinship 
present; though I must add that we have made no progress along that path. Both phenomena, sadism and masochism alike, but masochism quite especially, present a truly puzzling problem to the libido theory; and it is only proper if what was a stumbling-block for the one theory should become the cornerstone of the 
theory replacing it. 
   It is our opinion, then, that in sadism and in masochism we have before us two excellent examples of a mixture of the two classes of instinct, of Eros and aggressiveness; and we proceed to the hypothesis that 
this relation is a model one - that every instinctual impul se that we can examine consists of similar fusions 
or alloys of the two classes of instinct. These fusions, of course, would be in the most varied ratios. Thus the erotic instincts would introduce the multiplicity of their sexual aims into the fusion, while the others 
would only admit of mitigations or gradations in their monotonous trend. This hypothesis opens a prospect 
to us of investigations which may some day be of great importance for the understanding of pathological 
processes. For fusions may also come apart, and we may expect that functioning will be most gravely 
affected by defusions of such a kind. But these conceptions are still too new; no one has yet tried to apply 
them in our work. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4709  
 
   Let us go back to the special problem presented to us by masochism. If for a moment we leave its erotic 
components on one side, it affords us a guarantee of the existence of a trend that has self-destruction as its 
aim. If it is true of the destructive instinct as well t hat the ego - but what we have in mind here is rather the 
id, the whole person - originally includes all the instinctual impulses, we are led to the view that masochism is older than sadism, and that sadism is the destruc tive instinct directed outwards, thus acquiring the 
characteristic of aggressiveness. A certain amount of the original destructive instinct may still remain in the interior. It seems that we can only perceive it under two conditions: if it is combined with erotic instincts into masochism or if - with a greater or lesser erotic addition - it is directed against the external world as 
aggressiveness. And now we are struck by the significance of the possibility that the aggressiveness may 
not be able to find satisfaction in the external world because it comes up against real obstacles. If this happens, it will perhaps retreat and increase the amount of self-destructiveness holding sway in the interior. 
We shall hear how this is in fact what occurs and how important a process this is. Impeded aggressiveness 
seems to involve a grave injury. It really seems as though it is necessary for us to destroy some other thing or person in order not to destroy ourselves, in order to guard against the impulsion to self-destruction. A sad disclosure indeed for the moralist! 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4710  
 
   But the moralist will console himself for a long time to come with the improbability of our speculations. A 
queer instinct indeed, directed to the destruction of its own organic home! Poets, it is true, talk of such 
things; but poets are irresponsible people and enjoy the pr ivilege of poetic licence. Incidentally, such ideas 
are not foreign even to physiology: consider the noti on, for instance, of the mucous membrane of the 
stomach digesting itself. It must be admitted, however, that our self-destructive instinct calls for support on 
a wider basis. One cannot, after all, venture on a hypothesis of such a wide range merely because a few 
poor fools have linked their sexual satisfaction to a peculiar condition. A more profound study of the instincts will, I believe, give us what we need. The instincts rule not only mental but also vegetative life, and 
these organic instincts exhibit a characteristic which deserves our deepest interest. (We shall not be able to 
judge until later whether it is a general characteristic of instincts.) For they reveal an effort to restore an earlier state of things. We may suppose that from the moment at which a state of things that has once been 
attained is upset, an instinct arises to create it afresh and brings about phenomena which we can describe as a ‘compulsion to repeat’. Thus the whole of embryology is an example of the compulsion to repeat. A power of regenerating lost organs extends far up into the animal kingdom, and the instinct for recovery to which, alongside of therapeutic assistance, our cures are due must be the residue of this capacity which is 
so enormously developed in the lower animals. The spawning migrations of fishes, the migratory flights of birds, and possibly all that we describe as manifestations of instinct in animals, take place under the orders of the compulsion to repeat, which expresses the conservative nature of the instincts. Nor have we far to 
look in the mental field for its manifestations. We have been struck by the fact that the forgotten and repressed experiences of childhood are reproduced during the work of analysis in dreams and reactions, particularly in those occurring in the transference, although their revival runs counter to the interest of the 
pleasure principle; and we have explained this by supposing that in these cases a compulsion to repeat is 
overcoming even the pleasure principle. Outside analysi s, too, something similar can be observed. There 
are people in whose lives the same reactions are perpetually being repeated uncorrected, to their own detriment, or others who seem to be pursued by a relentless fate, though closer investigation teaches us 
that they are unwittingly bringing this fate on themselves. In such cases we attribute a ‘daemonic’ character 
to the compulsion to repeat.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4711  
 
   But how can this conservative characteristic of instincts help us to understand our self-destructiveness? 
What earlier state of things does an instinct such as this want to restore? Well, the answer is not far to seek 
and opens wide perspectives. If it is true that - at some immeasurably remote time and in a manner we cannot conceive - life once proceeded out of inorganic matter, then, according to our presumption, an instinct must have arisen which sought to do away with life once more and to re-establish the inorganic 
state. If we recognize in this instinct the self-destructiveness of our hypothesis, we may regard the self-
destructiveness as an expression of a ‘death instinct’ which cannot fail to be present in every vital process. And now the instincts that we believe in divide themselves into two groups - the erotic instincts, which seek 
to combine more and more living substance into ever greater unities, and the death instincts, which oppose 
this effort and lead what is living back into an inor ganic state. From the concurrent and opposing action of 
these two proceed the phenomena of life which are brought to an end by death. 
   You may perhaps shrug your shoulders and say: ‘That isn’t natural science, it’s Schopenhauer’s 
philosophy!’ But, Ladies and Gentlemen, why should not a bold thinker have guessed something that is afterwards confirmed by sober and painstaking detailed research? Moreover, there is nothing that has not 
been said already, and similar things had been said by many people before Schopenhauer. Furthermore, 
what we are saying is not even genuine Schopenhauer. We are not asserting that death is the only aim of 
life; we are not overlooking the fact that there is life as well as death. We recognize two basic instincts and give each of them its own aim. How the two of them  are mingled in the process of living, how the death 
instinct is made to serve the purposes of Eros, especially by being turned outwards as aggressiveness - these are tasks which are left to future investigation. We have not gone beyond the point at which this prospect lies open before us. The question, too, of whether the conservative character may not belong to all 
instincts without exception, whether the erotic inst incts as well may not be seeking to bring back an earlier 
state of things when they strive to bring about a synthesis of living things into greater unities - this question, 
too, we must leave unanswered.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4712  
 
 
   We have travelled somewhat far from our basis. I will tell you in retrospect the starting-point of these 
reflections on the theory of the instincts. It was the same  as that which led us to revise the relation between 
the ego and the unconscious - the impression derived from the work of analysis that the patient who puts up a resistance is so often unaware of that resistance. Not only the fact of the resistance is unconscious to 
him, however, but its motives as well. We were obliged to search out these motives or motive, and to our surprise we found them in a powerful need for punishment which we could only class with masochistic wishes. The practical significance of this discovery is not less than its theoretical one, for the need for 
punishment is the worst enemy of our therapeutic efforts. It is satisfied by the suffering which is linked to the 
neurosis, and for that reason holds fast to being ill. It seems that this factor, an unconscious need for punishment, has a share in every neurotic illness. And here those cases in which the neurotic suffering can 
be replaced by suffering of another kind are wholly convincing. I will report an experience of this kind. 
   I once succeeded in freeing an unmarried woman, no longer young, from the complex of symptoms which had condemned her for some fifteen years to an existence of torment and had excluded her from any participation in life. She now felt she was well, and she plunged into eager activity, in order to develop her 
by no means small talent and to snatch a little recognition, enjoyment, and success, late though the 
moment was. But every one of her attempts ended either with people letting her know or with herself recognizing that she was too old to accomplish anything in that field. After each outcome of this kind a 
relapse into illness would have been the obvious thing, but she was no longer able to bring that about. 
Instead, she met each time with an accident which put her out of action for a time and caused her suffering. She fell down and sprained her ankle or hurt her knee, or she injured her hand in something she was doing. 
When she was made aware of how great her own share might be in these apparent accidents, she, so to 
say, changed her technique. Instead of accidents, i ndispositions appeared on the same provocations - 
catarrhs, sore throats, influenzal conditions, rheumatic swellings - till at last she made up her mind to resign her attempts and the whole agitation came to an end. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4713  
 
   There is, as we think, no doubt about the origin of this unconscious need for punishment. It behaves like a 
piece of conscience, like a prolongation of our conscience into the unconscious; and it must have the same 
origin as conscience and correspond, therefore, to a piece of aggressiveness that has been internalized and taken over by the super-ego. If only the words went together better, we should be justified for all practical purposes in calling it an ‘unconscious sense of guilt’. Theoretically we are in fact in doubt whether 
we should suppose that all the aggressiveness that has  returned from the external world is bound by the 
super-ego and accordingly turned against the ego, or that a part of it is carrying on its mute and uncanny 
activity as a free destructive instinct in the ego and the id. A distribution of the latter kind is the more 
probable; but we know nothing more about it. There is no doubt that, when the super-ego was first 
instituted, in equipping that agency use was made of the piece of the child’s aggressiveness towards his parents for which he was unable to effect a discharge outwards on account of his erotic fixation as well as 
of external difficulties; and for that reason the seve rity of the super-ego need not simply correspond to the 
strictness of the upbringing. It is very possible that, when there are later occasions for suppressing 
aggressiveness, the instinct may take the same path that was opened to it at that decisive point of time.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4714  
 
   People in whom this unconscious sense of guilt is excessively strong betray themselves in analytic 
treatment by the negative therapeutic reaction which is  so disagreeable from the prognostic point of view. 
When one has given them the solution of a symptom, which should normally be followed by at least its 
temporary disappearance, what they produce instead is a momentary exacerbation of the symptom and of the illness. It is often enough to praise them for their behaviour in the treatment or to say a few hopeful 
words about the progress of the analysis in order to bring about an unmistakable worsening of their 
condition. A non-analyst would say that the ‘will to recovery’ was absent. If you follow the analytic way of thinking, you will see in this behaviour a manifestation of the unconscious sense of guilt, for which being ill, 
with its sufferings and impediments, is just what is  wanted. The problems which the unconscious sense of 
guilt has opened up, its connections with morality, educ ation, crime and delinquency, are at present the 
preferred field of work for psycho-analysts.    And here, at an unexpected point, we have emerged from the psychical underworld into the open market-
place. I cannot lead you any further, but before I take leave of you for to-day I must detain you with one 
more train of thought. It has become our habit to say that our civilization has been built up at the cost of sexual trends which, being inhibited by society, are partly, it is true, repressed but have partly been made 
usable for other aims. We have admitted, too, that, in spite of all our pride in our cultural attainments, it is 
not easy for us to fulfil the requirements of this civilization or to feel comfortable in it, because the instinctual restrictions imposed on us constitute a heavy psychical burden. Well, what we have come to see about the 
sexual instincts, applies equally and perhaps still more to the other ones, the aggressive instincts. It is they 
above all that make human communal life difficult and threaten its survival. Restriction of the individual’s aggressiveness is the first and perhaps the severest sacrifice which society requires of him. We have learnt 
the ingenious way in which the taming of this unruly thing has been achieved. The institution of the super-
ego which takes over the dangerous aggressive impulses, introduces a garrison, as it were, into regions 
that are inclined to rebellion. But on the other hand, if we look at it purely psychologically, we must recognize that the ego does not feel happy in being thus  sacrificed to the needs of society, in having to 
submit to the destructive trends of aggressiveness which it would have been glad to employ itself against others. It is like a prolongation in the mental sphere of the dilemma of ‘eat or be eaten’ which dominates the 
organic animate world. Luckily the aggressive instincts are never alone but always alloyed with the erotic 
ones. These latter have much to mitigate and much to avert under the conditions of the civilization which 
mankind has created.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4715  
 
LECTURE XXXIII 
 
FEMININITY 
 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN , - All the while I am preparing to talk to you I am struggling with an internal 
difficulty. I feel uncertain, so to speak, of the extent of my licence. It is true that in the course of fifteen years 
of work psycho-analysis has changed and grown richer; but, in spite of that, an introduction to psycho-analysis might have been left without alteration or supplement. It is constantly in my mind that these 
lectures are without a raison d’etre . For analysts I am saying too little and nothing at all that is new; but for 
you I am saying too much and saying things which you are not equipped to understand and which are not in 
your province. I have looked around for excuses and I have tried to justify each separate lecture on different 
grounds. The first one, on the theory of dreams, was supposed to put you back again at one blow into the 
analytic atmosphere and to show you how durable our views have turned out to be. I was led on to the second one, which followed the paths from dreams to what is called occultism, by the opportunity of speaking my mind without constraint on a department of work in which prejudiced expectations are fighting 
to-day against passionate resistances, and I could hope that your judgement, educated to tolerance on the example of psycho-analysis, would not refuse to accompany me on the excursion. The third lecture, on the dissection of the personality, certainly made the hardest demands upon you with its unfamiliar subject-
matter; but it was impossible for me to keep this first beginning of an ego-psychology back from you, and if 
we had possessed it fifteen years ago I should have had to m ention it to you then. My last lecture, finally, 
which you were probably able to follow only by great exertions, brought forward necessary corrections - 
fresh attempts at solving the most important  conundrums; and my introduction would have been leading 
you astray if I had been silent about them. As you see, when one starts making excuses it turns out in the 
end that it was all inevitable, all the work of destiny. I submit to it, and I beg you to do the same.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4716  
 
   To-day’s lecture, too, should have no place in an in troduction; but it may serve to give you an example of 
a detailed piece of analytic work, and I can say two things to recommend it. It brings forward nothing but 
observed facts, almost without any speculative additi ons, and it deals with a subject which has a claim on 
your interest second almost to no other. Throughout history people have knocked their heads against the riddle of the nature of femininity - 
 
   Häupter in Hieroglyphenmützen, 
   Häupter in Turban und schwarzem Barett,    Perückenhäupter und tausend andre 
   Arme, schwitzende Menschenhäupter. . . .
¹ 
 
   Nor will you have escaped worrying over this problem - thos e of you who are men; to those of you who 
are women this will not apply - you are yourselves the problem. When you meet a human being, the first 
distinction you make is ‘male or female?’ and you are accustomed to make the distinction with unhesitating certainty. Anatomical science shares your certaint y at one point and not much further. The male sexual 
product, the spermatozoon, and its vehicle are male; the ovum and the organism that harbours it are female. In both sexes organs have been formed which serve exclusively for the sexual functions; they were probably developed from the same disposition into two different forms. Besides this, in both sexes the other 
organs, the bodily shapes and tissues, show the influence of  the individual’s sex, but this is inconstant and 
its amount variable; these are what are known as t he secondary sexual characters. Science next tells you 
something that runs counter to your expectations and is probably calculated to confuse your feelings. It draws your attention to the fact that portions of the male sexual apparatus also appear in women’s bodies, 
though in an atrophied state, and vice versa in the alternative case. It regards their occurrence as indications of bisexuality , as though an individual is not a man or a woman but always both - merely a 
certain amount more the one than the other. You will then be asked to make yourselves familiar with the idea that the proportion in which masculine and feminine are mixed in an individual is subject to quite considerable fluctuations. Since, however, apart from the very rarest cases, only one kind of sexual product - ova or semen - is nevertheless present in one person, you are bound to have doubts as to the decisive 
significance of those elements and must conclude that what constitutes masculinity or femininity is an 
unknown characteristic which anatomy cannot lay hold of.  
   ¹ Heads in hieroglyphic bonnets, 
      Heads in turbans and black birettas,       Heads in wigs and thousand other       Wretched, sweating heads of humans....                    (Heine, Nordsee.)
  
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4717  
 
 
   Can psychology do so perhaps? We are accustomed to employ ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ as mental 
qualities as well, and have in the same way transferred the notion of bisexuality to mental life. Thus we speak of a person, whether male or female, as behaving in a masculine way in one connection and in a feminine way in another. But you will soon perceive that this is only giving way to anatomy or to convention. 
You cannot give the concepts of ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ any new connotation. The distinction is not a 
psychological one; when you say ‘masculine’, you usually mean ‘active’, and when you say ‘feminine’, you 
usually mean ‘passive’. Now it is true that a relation of the kind exists. The male sex-cell is actively mobile 
and searches out the female one, and the latter, the ovum, is immobile and waits passively. This behaviour 
of the elementary sexual organisms is indeed a model for the conduct of sexual individuals during intercourse. The male pursues the female for the purpose of sexual union, seizes hold of her and 
penetrates into her. But by this you have precisely reduced the characteristic of masculinity to the factor of 
aggressiveness so far as psychology is concerned. You may well doubt whether you have gained any real 
advantage from this when you reflect that in some classes of animals the females are the stronger and more aggressive and the male is active only in the single act of sexual union. This is so, for instance, with 
the spiders. Even the functions of rearing and caring for the young, which strike us as feminine par 
excellence, are not invariably attached to the female sex in animals. In quite high species we find that the 
sexes share the task of caring for the young between them or even that the male alone devotes himself to 
it. Even in the sphere of human sexual life you soon see how inadequate it is to make masculine behaviour 
coincide with activity and feminine with passivity. A mother is active in every sense towards her child; the act of lactation itself may equally be described as the mother suckling the baby or as her being sucked by it. 
The further you go from the narrow sexual sphere the more obvious will the ‘error of superimposition’ become. Women can display great activity in various directions, men are not able to live in company with their own kind unless they develop a large amount of passive adaptability. If you now tell me that these facts go to prove precisely that both men and women are bisexual in the psychological sense, I shall 
conclude that you have decided in your own minds to make ‘active’ coincide with ‘masculine’ and ‘passive’ 
with ‘feminine’. But I advise you against it. It seems to me to serve no useful purpose and adds nothing to our knowledge. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4718  
 
   One might consider characterizing femininity psychologically as giving preference to passive aims. This is 
not, of course, the same thing as passivity; to achieve a passive aim may call for a large amount of activity. 
It is perhaps the case that in a woman, on the basis of her share in the sexual function, a preference for passive behaviour and passive aims is carried over into her life to a greater or lesser extent, in proportion to the limits, restricted or far-reaching, within which her sexual life thus serves as a model. But we must 
beware in this of underestimating the influence of social customs, which similarly force women into passive 
situations. All this is still far from being cleared up. There is one particularly constant relation between femininity and instinctual life which we do not want to overlook. The suppression of women’s 
aggressiveness which is prescribed for them constitutionally and imposed on them socially favours the 
development of powerful masochistic impulses, which succeed, as we know, in binding erotically the destructive trends which have been diverted inwards. Thus masochism, as people say, is truly feminine. 
But if, as happens so often, you meet with masochism in men, what is left to you but to say that these men 
exhibit very plain feminine traits?    And now you are already prepared to hear that psychology too is unable to solve the riddle of femininity. The explanation must no doubt come from elsewhere, and cannot come till we have learnt how in general 
the differentiation of living organisms into two sexes came about. We know nothing about it, yet the 
existence of two sexes is a most striking characteristic of organic life which distinguishes it sharply from inanimate nature. However, we find enough to study in those human individuals who, through the 
possession of female genitals, are characterized as manifestly or predominantly feminine. In conformity 
with its peculiar nature, psycho-analysis does not try to describe what a woman is - that would be a task it could scarcely perform - but sets about enquiring how she comes into being, how a woman develops out of 
a child with a bisexual disposition. In recent times we have begun to learn a little about this, thanks to the 
circumstance that several of our excellent women colleagues in analysis have begun to work at the question. The discussion of this has gained special attractiveness from the distinction between the sexes. For the ladies, whenever some comparison seemed to turn out unfavourable to their sex, were able to utter 
a suspicion that we, the male analysts, had been unable to overcome certain deeply-rooted prejudices 
against what was feminine, and that this was being paid for in the partiality of our researches. We, on the other hand, standing on the ground of bisexuality, had no difficulty in avoiding impoliteness. We had only to 
say: ‘This doesn’t apply to you. You’re the exception; on this point you’re more masculine than feminine.’ 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4719  
 
 
   We approach the investigation of the sexual development of women with two expectations. The first is 
that here once more the constitution will not adapt itself to its function without a struggle. The second is that the decisive turning-points will already have been prepared for or completed before puberty. Both expectations are promptly confirmed. Furthermore, a comparison with what happens with boys tells us that 
the development of a little girl into a normal woman is more difficult and more complicated, since it includes 
two extra tasks, to which there is nothing corresponding in the development of a man. Let us follow the parallel lines from their beginning. Undoubtedly the material is different to start with in boys and girls: it did 
not need psycho-analysis to establish that. The difference in the structure of the genitals is accompanied by 
other bodily differences which are too well known to call for mention. Differences emerge too in the instinctual disposition which give a glimpse of the later nature of women. A little girl is as a rule less 
aggressive, defiant and self-sufficient; she seems to have a greater need for being shown affection and on 
that account to be more dependent and pliant. It is probably only as a result of this pliancy that she can be taught more easily and quicker to control her excretions : urine and faeces are the first gifts that children 
make to those who look after them, and controlling them is the first concession to which the instinctual life 
of children can be induced. One gets an impression, too, that little girls are more intelligent and livelier than boys of the same age; they go out more to meet the external world and at the same time form stronger object-cathexes. I cannot say whether this lead in development has been confirmed by exact observations, 
but in any case there is no question that girls cannot be described as intellectually backward. These sexual differences are not, however, of great consequence: t hey can be outweighed by individual variations. For 
our immediate purposes they can be disregarded. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4720  
 
   Both sexes seem to pass through the early phases of libidinal development in the same manner. It might 
have been expected that in girls there would already have been some lag in aggressiveness in the sadistic-
anal phase, but such is not the case. Analysis of children’s play has shown our women analysts that the aggressive impulses of little girls leave nothing to be desired in the way of abundance and violence. With their entry into the phallic phase the differences between the sexes are completely eclipsed by their 
agreements. We are now obliged to recognize that the little girl is a little man. In boys, as we know, this 
phase is marked by the fact that they have learnt how  to derive pleasurable sensations from their small 
penis and connect its excited state with their ideas of sexual intercourse. Little girls do the same thing with 
their still smaller clitoris. It seems that with them all their masturbatory acts are carried out on this penis-
equivalent, and that the truly feminine vagina is still undiscovered by both sexes. It is true that there are a few isolated reports of early vaginal sensations as we ll, but it could not be easy to distinguish these from 
sensations in the anus or vestibulum; in any case they cannot play a great part. We are entitled to keep to our view that in the phallic phase of girls the clitoris is the leading erotogenic zone. But it is not, of course, going to remain so. With the change to femininity the clitoris should wholly or in part hand over its sensitivity, and at the same time its importance, to  the vagina. This would be one of the two tasks which a 
woman has to perform in the course of her development, whereas the more fortunate man has only to continue at the time of his sexual maturity the activity  that he has previously carried out at the period of the 
early efflorescence of his sexuality. 
   We shall return to the part played by the clitoris; let us now turn to the second task with which a girl’s 
development is burdened. A boy’s mother is the first object of his love, and she remains so too during the formation of his Oedipus complex and, in essence, all through his life. For a girl too her first object must be 
her mother (and the figures of wet-nurses and foster-mothers that merge into her). The first object-cathexes 
occur in attachment to the satisfaction of the major and simple vital needs, and the circumstances of the care of children are the same for both sexes. But in the Oedipus situation the girl’s father has become her love-object, and we expect that in the normal course of development she will find her way from this paternal 
object to her final choice of an object. In the course of time, therefore, a girl has to change her erotogenic 
zone and her object - both of which a boy retains. The question then arises of how this happens: in particular, how does a girl pass from her mother to an attachment to her father? or, in other words, how 
does she pass from her masculine phase to the feminine one to which she is biologically destined? 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4721  
 
   It would be a solution of ideal simplicity if we could suppose that from a particular age onwards the 
elementary influence of the mutual attraction between the sexes makes itself felt and impels the small 
woman towards men, while the same law allows the boy to continue with his mother. We might suppose in addition that in this the children are following the point er given them by the sexual preference of their 
parents. But we are not going to find things so easy; we scarcely know whether we are to believe seriously 
in the power of which poets talk so much and with such enthusiasm but which cannot be further dissected 
analytically. We have found an answer of quite another so rt by means of laborious investigations, the 
material for which at least was easy to arrive at. For you must know that the number of women who remain 
till a late age tenderly dependent on a paternal object, or indeed on their real father, is very great. We have 
established some surprising facts about these women with an intense attachment of long duration to their father. We knew, of course, that there had been a preliminary stage of attachment to the mother, but we did 
not know that it could be so rich in content and so long-lasting, and could leave behind so many 
opportunities for fixations and dispositions. During this time the girl’s father is only a troublesome rival; in some cases the attachment to her mother lasts beyond the fourth year of life. Almost everything that we find later in her relation to her father was already present in this earlier attachment and has been 
transferred subsequently on to her father. In short, we get an impression that we cannot understand women 
unless we appreciate this phase of their pre-Oedipus attachment to their mother.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4722  
 
   We shall be glad, then, to know the nature of the girl’s libidinal relations to her mother. The answer is that 
they are of very many different kinds. Since they persist through all three phases of infantile sexuality, they 
also take on the characteristics of the different phases and express themselves by oral, sadistic-anal and phallic wishes. These wishes represent active as well as passive impulses; if we relate them to the differentiation of the sexes which is to appear later - though we should avoid doing so as far as possible - 
we may call them masculine and feminine. Besides this, they are completely ambivalent, both affectionate 
and of a hostile and aggressive nature. The latter often only come to light after being changed into anxiety ideas. It is not always easy to point to a formulation of these early sexual wishes; what is most clearly 
expressed is a wish to get the mother with child and the corresponding wish to bear her a child - both 
belonging to the phallic period and sufficiently surprising, but established beyond doubt by analytic observation. The attractiveness of these investigations  lies in the surprising detailed findings which they 
bring us. Thus, for instance, we discover the fear of being murdered or poisoned, which may later form the core of a paranoic illness, already present in this pre-Oedipus period, in relation to the mother. Or another case: you will recall an interesting episode in the history of analytic research which caused me many distressing hours. In the period in which the main interest was directed to discovering infantile sexual 
traumas, almost all my women patients told me that they had been seduced by their father. I was driven to 
recognize in the end that these reports were untrue and so came to understand that hysterical symptoms are derived from phantasies and not from real occurrences. It was only later that I was able to recognize in 
this phantasy of being seduced by the father the expre ssion of the typical Oedipus complex in women. And 
now we find the phantasy of seduction once more in the pr e-Oedipus prehistory of girls; but the seducer is 
regularly the mother. Here, however, the phantasy touches the ground of reality, for it was really the mother who by her activities over the child’s bodily hygi ene inevitably stimulated, and perhaps even roused for the 
first time, pleasurable sensations in her genitals. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4723  
 
   I have no doubt you are ready to suspect that this  portrayal of the abundance and strength of a little girl’s 
sexual relations with her mother is very much overdrawn. After all, one has opportunities of seeing little girls 
and notices nothing of the sort. But the objection is not  to the point. Enough can be seen in the children if 
one knows how to look. And besides, you should consider how little of its sexual wishes a child can bring to preconscious expression or communicate at all. Accordingly we are only within our rights if we study the 
residues and consequences of this emotional world in retrospect, in people in whom these processes of 
development had attained a specially clear and even excessive degree of expansion. Pathology has always done us the service of making discernible by isol ation and exaggeration conditions which would remain 
concealed in a normal state. And since our investigations have been carried out on people who were by no means seriously abnormal, I think we should regard their outcome as deserving belief.    We will now turn our interest on to the single question of what it is that brings this powerful attachment of 
the girl to her mother to an end. This, as we know, is its usual fate: it is destined to make room for an 
attachment to her father. Here we come upon a fact which is a pointer to our further advance. This step in development does not involve only a simple change of object. The turning away from the mother is accompanied by hostility; the attachment to the mother ends in hate. A hate of that kind may become very 
striking and last all through life; it may be carefully overcompensated later on; as a rule one part of it is 
overcome while another part persists. Events of later years naturally influence this greatly. We will restrict ourselves, however, to studying it at the time at which the girl turns to her father and to enquiring into the 
motives for it. We are then given a long list of accusations and grievances against the mother which are 
supposed to justify the child’s hostile feelings; they are of varying validity which we shall not fail to examine. A number of them are obvious rationalizations and the true sources of enmity remain to be found. I hope 
you will be interested if on this occasion I take you through all the details of a psycho-analytic investigation. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4724  
 
   The reproach against the mother which goes back furthes t is that she gave the child too little milk - which 
is construed against her as lack of love. Now there is some justification for this reproach in our families. 
Mothers often have insufficient nourishment to give their children and are content to suckle them for a few months, for half or three-quarters of a year. Among primitive peoples children are fed at their mother’s breast for two or three years. The figure of the wet-nurse who suckles the child is as a rule merged into the 
mother; when this has not happened, the reproach is tu rned into another one - that the nurse, who fed the 
child so willingly, was sent away by the mother too early. But whatever the true state of affairs may have 
been, it is impossible that the child’s reproach can be just ified as often as it is met with. It seems, rather, 
that the child’s avidity for its earliest nourishment is altogether insatiable, that it never gets over the pain of losing its mother’s breast. I should not be surprised if the analysis of a primitive child, who could still suck at its mother’s breast when it was already able to run about and talk, were to bring the same reproach to light. 
The fear of being poisoned is also probably connected with the withdrawal of the breast. Poison is 
nourishment that makes one ill. Perhaps children trace back their early illnesses too to this frustration. A fair amount of intellectual education is a prerequisite for believing in chance; primitive people and uneducated 
ones, and no doubt children as well, are able to assign a ground for everything that happens. Perhaps 
originally it was a reason on animistic lines. Even to-day in some strata of our population no one can die 
without having been killed by someone else - preferabl y by the doctor. And the regular reaction of a 
neurotic to the death of someone closely connected with him is to put the blame on himself for having 
caused the death. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4725  
 
   The next accusation against the child’s mother flares up when the next baby appears in the nursery. If 
possible the connection with oral frustration is preserv ed: the mother could not or would not give the child 
any more milk because she needed the nourishment for the new arrival. In cases in which the two children 
are so close in age that lactation is prejudiced by the second pregnancy, this reproach acquires a real basis, and it is a remarkable fact that a child, even with an age difference of only 11 months, is not too 
young to take notice of what is happening. But what the child grudges the unwanted intruder and rival is not only the suckling but all the other signs of maternal care. It feels that it has been dethroned, despoiled, prejudiced in its rights; it casts a jealous hatr ed upon the new baby and develops a grievance against the 
faithless mother which often finds expression in a disagreeable change in its behaviour. It becomes ‘naughty’, perhaps, irritable and disobedient and goes back on the advances it has made towards controlling its excretions. All of this has been very long familiar and is accepted as self-evident; but we 
rarely form a correct idea of the strength of these jeal ous impulses, of the tenacity with which they persist 
and of the magnitude of their influence on later developm ent. Especially as this jealousy is constantly 
receiving fresh nourishment in the later years of childhood and the whole shock is repeated with the birth of 
each new brother or sister. Nor does it make much difference if the child happens to remain the mother’s 
preferred favourite. A child’s demands for love are immoderate, they make exclusive claims and tolerate no 
sharing.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4726  
 
   An abundant source of a child’s hostility to its mother is provided by its multifarious sexual wishes, which 
alter according to the phase of the libido and which cannot for the most part be satisfied. The strongest of 
these frustrations occur at the phallic period, if the mother forbids pleasurable activity with the genitals - often with severe threats and every sign of displeasure - activity to which, after all, she herself had introduced the child. One would think these were reasons enough to account for a girl’s turning away from 
her mother. One would judge, if so, that the estrangement follows inevitably from the nature of children’s 
sexuality, from the immoderate character of their demand for love and the impossibility of fulfilling their sexual wishes. It might be thought indeed that this first love-relation of the child’s is doomed to dissolution 
for the very reason that it is the first, for these ear ly object-cathexes are regularly ambivalent to a high 
degree. A powerful tendency to aggressiveness is always present beside a powerful love, and the more 
passionately a child loves its object the more sensitive does it become to disappointments and frustrations 
from that object; and in the end the love must succumb to the accumulated hostility. Or the idea that there 
is an original ambivalence such as this in erotic ca thexes may be rejected, and it may be pointed out that it 
is the special nature of the mother-child relation that leads, with equal inevitability, to the destruction of the 
child’s love; for even the mildest upbringing cannot avoid using compulsion and introducing restrictions, and 
any such intervention in the child’s liberty must provoke as a reaction an inclination to rebelliousness and 
aggressiveness. A discussion of these possibilities might, I think, be most interesting; but an objection suddenly emerges which forces our interest in another direction. All these factors - the slights, the 
disappointments in love, the jealousy, the seduction followed by prohibition - are, after all, also in operation 
in the relation of a boy  to his mother and are yet unable to alienate him from the maternal object. Unless we 
can find something that is specific for girls and is not present or not in the same way present in boys, we 
shall not have explained the termination of the attachment of girls to their mother. 
   I believe we have found this specific factor, and indeed where we expected to find it, even though in a surprising form. Where we expected to find it, I say, for it lies in the castration complex. After all, the anatomical distinction must express itself in psychical consequences. It was, however, a surprise to learn 
from analyses that girls hold their mother responsible for their lack of a penis and do not forgive her for their 
being thus put at a disadvantage.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4727  
 
   As you hear, then, we ascribe a castration complex to women as well. And for good reasons, though its 
content cannot be the same as with boys. In the latter the castration complex arises after they have learnt 
from the sight of the female genitals that the organ which they value so highly need not necessarily accompany the body. At this the boy recalls to mind the threats he brought on himself by his doings with that organ, he begins to give credence to them and falls under the influence of fear of castration, which will 
be the most powerful motive force in his subsequent development. The castration complex of girls is also 
started by the sight of the genitals of the other se x. They at once notice the difference and, it must be 
admitted, its significance too. They feel seriously wr onged, often declare that they want to ‘have something 
like it too’, and fall a victim to ‘envy for the penis’, which will leave ineradicable traces on their development and the formation of their character and which will not be surmounted in even the most favourable cases without a severe expenditure of psychical energy. The girl’s recognition of the fact of her being without a 
penis does not by any means imply that she submits to the fact easily. On the contrary, she continues to 
hold on for a long time to the wish to get something like it herself and she believes in that possibility for improbably long years; and analysis can show that, at a period when knowledge of reality has long since rejected the fulfilment of the wish as unattainable, it persists in the unconscious and retains a considerable 
cathexis of energy. The wish to get the longed-for penis eventually in spite of everything may contribute to 
the motives that drive a mature woman to analysis, and what she may reasonably expect from analysis - a capacity, for instance, to carry on an intellectual profession - may often be recognized as a sublimated 
modification of this repressed wish.    One cannot very well doubt the importance of envy for the penis. You may take it as an instance of male injustice if I assert that envy and jealousy play an even greater part in the mental life of women than of men. 
It is not that I think these characteristics are absent in  men or that I think they have no other roots in women 
than envy for the penis; but I am inclined to attribute their greater amount in women to this latter influence. 
Some analysts, however, have shown an inclination to deprec iate the importance of this first instalment of 
penis-envy in the phallic phase. They are of opinion that what we find of this attitude in women is in the 
main a secondary structure which has come about on the occasion of later conflicts by regression to this 
early infantile impulse. This, however, is a general problem of depth psychology. In many pathological - or even unusual - instinctual attitudes (for instance, in a ll sexual perversions) the question arises of how much 
of their strength is to be attributed to early infantile fixations and how much to the influence of later experiences and developments. In such cases it is almost always a matter of complemental series such as we put forward in our discussion of the aetiology of the neuroses. Both factors play a part in varying 
amounts in the causation; a less on the one side is bal anced by a more on the other. The infantile factor 
sets the pattern in all cases but does not always determine the issue, though it often does. Precisely in the 
case of penis-envy I should argue decidedly in favour of the preponderance of the infantile factor. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4728  
 
   The discovery that she is castrated is a turning-point in a girl’s growth. Three possible lines of 
development start from it: one leads to sexual inhibition or to neurosis, the second to change of character in 
the sense of a masculinity complex, the third, finally, to normal femininity. We have learnt a fair amount, though not everything, about all three.    The essential content of the first is as follows: the little girl has hitherto lived in a masculine way, has been 
able to get pleasure by the excitation of her clitoris and has brought this activity into relation with her sexual 
wishes directed towards her mother, which are often active ones; now, owing to the influence of her penis-envy, she loses her enjoyment in her phallic sexuality. Her self-love is mortified by the comparison with the 
boy’s far superior equipment and in consequence she renounces her masturbatory satisfaction from her clitoris, repudiates her love for her mother and at the same time not infrequently represses a good part of her sexual trends in general. No doubt her turning away from her mother does not occur all at once, for to 
begin with the girl regards her castration as an individual misfortune, and only gradually extends it to other 
females and finally to her mother as well. Her love was directed to her phallic  mother; with the discovery 
that her mother is castrated it becomes possible to drop her as an object, so that the motives for hostility, which have long been accumulating, gain the upper hand. This  means, therefore, that as a result of the 
discovery of women’s lack of a penis they are debased in value for girls just as they are for boys and later perhaps for men.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4729  
 
   You all know the immense aetiological importance attributed by our neurotic patients to their 
masturbation. They make it responsible for all their troubles and we have the greatest difficulty in 
persuading them that they are mistaken. In fact, however , we ought to admit to them that they are right, for 
masturbation is the executive agent of infantile sexuality, from the faulty development of which they are indeed suffering. But what neurotics mostly blame is the masturbation of the period of puberty; they have 
mostly forgotten that of early infancy, which is what is really in question. I wish I might have an opportunity some time of explaining to you at length how important  all the factual details of early masturbation become 
for the individual’s subsequent neurosis or character: whether or not it was discovered, how the parents 
struggled against it or permitted it, or whether he succeeded in suppressing it himself. All of this leaves 
permanent traces on his development. But I am on the whole glad that I need not do this. It would be a hard and tedious task and at the end of it you would put me in an embarrassing situation by quite certainly 
asking me to give you some practical advice as to how a parent or educator should deal with the 
masturbation of small children. From the development of girls, which is what my present lecture is 
concerned with, I can give you the example of a child herself trying to get free from masturbating. She does not always succeed in this. If envy for the penis has provoked a powerful impulse against clitoridal 
masturbation but this nevertheless refuses to give way, a violent struggle for liberation ensues in which the 
girl, as it were, herself takes over the role of her deposed mother and gives expression to her entire dissatisfaction with her inferior clitoris in her efforts against obtaining satisfaction from it. Many years later, 
when her masturbatory activity has long since been suppressed, an interest still persists which we must 
interpret as a defence against a temptation that is still dreaded. It manifests itself in the emergence of sympathy for those to whom similar difficulties are attributed, it plays a part as a motive in contracting a 
marriage and, indeed, it may determine the choice of a husband or lover. Disposing of early infantile 
masturbation is truly no easy or indifferent business.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4730  
 
   Along with the abandonment of clitoridal masturbation a certain amount of activity is renounced. Passivity 
now has the upper hand, and the girl’s turning to her father is accomplished principally with the help of 
passive instinctual impulses. You can see that a wave of development like this, which clears the phallic activity out of the way, smoothes the ground for femininity. If too much is not lost in the course of it through repression, this femininity may turn out to be normal. The wish with which the girl turns to her father is no 
doubt originally the wish for the penis which her mother has refused her and which she now expects from 
her father. The feminine situation is only established, however, if the wish for a penis is replaced by one for a baby, if, that is, a baby takes the place of a penis in accordance with an ancient symbolic equivalence. It 
has not escaped us that the girl has wished for a baby earlier, in the undisturbed phallic phase: that, of 
course, was the meaning of her playing with dolls. But that play was not in fact an expression of her femininity; it served as an identification with her mother with the intention of substituting activity for 
passivity. She was playing the part of her mother and the doll was herself: now she could do with the baby 
everything that her mother used to do with her. Not until the emergence of the wish for a penis does the doll-baby become a baby from the girl’s father, and thereafter the aim of the most powerful feminine wish. Her happiness is great if later on this wish for a baby finds fulfilment in reality, and quite especially so if the 
baby is a little boy who brings the longed-for penis with him. Often enough in her combined picture of ‘a 
baby from her father’ the emphasis is laid on the baby and her father left unstressed. In this way the ancient 
masculine wish for the possession of a penis is still faintly visible through the femininity now achieved. But 
perhaps we ought rather to recognize this wish for a penis as being par excellence  a feminine one. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4731  
 
   With the transference of the wish for a penis-baby on to her father, the girl has entered the situation of the 
Oedipus complex. Her hostility to her mother, which did not need to be freshly created, is now greatly 
intensified, for she becomes the girl’s rival, who receives from her father everything that she desires from him. For a long time the girl’s Oedipus complex concealed her pre-Oedipus attachment to her mother from our view, though it is nevertheless so important and leaves such lasting fixations behind it. For girls the 
Oedipus situation is the outcome of a long and difficult development; it is a kind of preliminary solution, a 
position of rest which is not soon abandoned, especially as the beginning of the latency period is not far 
distant. And we are now struck by a difference between the two sexes, which is probably momentous, in 
regard to the relation of the Oedipus complex to the castration complex. In a boy the Oedipus complex, in 
which he desires his mother and would like to get rid of his father as being a rival, develops naturally from the phase of his phallic sexuality. The threat of castration compels him, however, to give up that attitude. 
Under the impression of the danger of losing his penis, the Oedipus complex is abandoned, repressed and, 
in the most normal cases, entirely destroyed, and a severe super-ego is set up as its heir. What happens with a girl is almost the opposite. The castration complex prepares for the Oedipus complex instead of destroying it; the girl is driven out of her attachment to her mother through the influence of her envy for the 
penis and she enters the Oedipus situation as though into  a haven of refuge. In the absence of fear of 
castration the chief motive is lacking which leads boys to surmount the Oedipus complex. Girls remain in it 
for an indeterminate Iength of time; they demolish it la te and, even so, incompletely. In these circumstances 
the formation of the super-ego must suffer; it cannot attain the strength and independence which give it its cultural significance, and feminists are not pleased when we point out to them the effects of this factor upon the average feminine character. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4732  
 
   To go back a little. We mentioned as the second possible reaction to the discovery of female castration 
the development of a powerful masculinity complex. By this we mean that the girl refuses, as it were, to 
recognize the unwelcome fact and, defiantly rebellious, even exaggerates her previous masculinity, clings to her clitoridal activity and takes refuge in an identification with her phallic mother or her father. What can it be that decides in favour of this outcome? We can onl y suppose that it is a constitutional factor, a greater 
amount of activity, such as is ordinarily characteristic  of a male. However that may be, the essence of this 
process is that at this point in development the wave of passivity is avoided which opens the way to the turn 
towards femininity. The extreme achievement of such a masculinity complex would appear to be the 
influencing of the choice of an object in the sense of  manifest homosexuality. Analytic experience teaches 
us, to be sure, that female homosexuality is seldom or never a direct continuation of infantile masculinity. 
Even for a girl of this kind it seems necessary that she should take her father as an object for some time 
and enter the Oedipus situation. But afterwards, as a result of her inevitable disappointments from her 
father, she is driven to regress into her early masculinity complex. The significance of these disappointments must not be exaggerated; a girl who is destined to become feminine is not spared them, though they do not have the same effect. The predominance of the constitutional factor seems indisputable; 
but the two phases in the development of female homosexuality are well mirrored in the practices of 
homosexuals, who play the parts of mother and baby wi th each other as often and as clearly as those of 
husband and wife. 
 
   What I have been telling you here may be described as the prehistory of women. It is a product of the very last few years and may have been of interest to y ou as an example of detailed analytic work. Since its 
subject is woman, I will venture on this occasion to mention by name a few of the women who have made valuable contributions to this investigation. Dr. Ruth Mack Brunswick was the first to describe a case of neurosis which went back to a fixation in the pre-Oedipus stage and had never reached the Oedipus situation at all. The case took the form of jealous paranoia and proved accessible to therapy. Dr. Jeanne 
Lampl-de Groot has established the incredible phallic activity of girls towards their mother by some assured 
observations, and Dr. Helene Deutsch has shown that the erotic actions of homosexual women reproduce 
the relations between mother and baby. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4733  
 
   It is not my intention to pursue the further behaviour of femininity through puberty to the period of 
maturity. Our knowledge, moreover, would be insufficient for the purpose. But I will bring a few features 
together in what follows. Taking its prehistory as a starting-point, I will only emphasize here that the development of femininity remains exposed to disturbance by the residual phenomena of the early masculine period. Regressions to the fixations of the pre-Oedipus phases very frequently occur; in the 
course of some women’s lives there is a repeated alternation between periods in which masculinity or 
femininity gains the upper hand. Some portion of what we men call ‘the enigma of women’ may perhaps be derived from this expression of bisexuality in women’s lives. But another question seems to have become 
ripe for judgement in the course of these researches. We have called the motive force of sexual life ‘the 
libido’. Sexual life is dominated by the polarity of ma sculine-feminine; thus the notion suggests itself of 
considering the relation of the libido to this antithesis. It would not be surprising if it were to turn out that each sexuality had its own special libido appropriated to it, so that one sort of libido would pursue the aims 
of a masculine sexual life and another sort those of a fe minine one. But nothing of the kind is true. There is 
only one libido, which serves both the masculine and the fe minine sexual functions. To it itself we cannot 
assign any sex; if, following the conventional equation of activity and masculinity, we are inclined to 
describe it as masculine, we must not forget that it also covers trends with a passive aim. Nevertheless the 
juxtaposition ‘feminine libido’ is without any justification. Furthermore, it is our impression that more constraint has been applied to the libido when it is pr essed into the service of the feminine function, and 
that - to speak teleologically - Nature takes less careful account of its demands than in the case of masculinity. And the reason for this may lie - thinking once again teleologically - in the fact that the accomplishment of the aim of biology has been entrusted to the aggressiveness of men and has been 
made to some extent independent of women’s consent. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4734  
 
   The sexual frigidity of women, the frequency of which appears to confirm this disregard, is a phenomenon 
that is still insufficiently understood. Sometimes it is psychogenic and in that case accessible to influence; 
but in other cases it suggests the hypothesis of its being constitutionally determined and even of there 
being a contributory anatomical factor.    I have promised to tell you of a few more psychical peculiarities of mature femininity, as we come across 
them in analytic observation. We do not lay claim to more than an average validity for these assertions; nor 
is it always easy to distinguish what should be ascribed to the influence of the sexual function and what to social breeding. Thus, we attribute a larger amount of narcissism to femininity, which also affects women’s 
choice of object, so that to be loved is a stronger need for them than to love. The effect of penis-envy has a 
share, further, in the physical vanity of women, since they are bound to value their charms more highly as a late compensation for their original sexual inferiority. Shame, which is considered to be a feminine 
characteristic par excellence  but is far more a matter of convention than might be supposed, has as its 
purpose, we believe, concealment of genital deficiency. We are not forgetting that at a later time shame 
takes on other functions. It seems that women have made few contributions to the discoveries and inventions in the history of civilization; there is, however, one technique which they may have invented - 
that of plaiting and weaving. If that is so, we should be tempted to guess the unconscious motive for the achievement. Nature herself would seem to have given the model which this achievement imitates by causing the growth at maturity of the pubic hair t hat conceals the genitals. The step that remained to be 
taken lay in making the threads adhere to one another, while on the body they stick into the skin and are only matted together. If you reject this idea as fantastic and regard my belief in the influence of lack of a penis on the configuration of femininity as an idée fixe, I am of course defenceless. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4735  
 
   The determinants of women’s choice of an object are often made unrecognizable by social conditions. 
Where the choice is able to show itself freely, it is often made in accordance with the narcissistic ideal of 
the man whom the girl had wished to become. If the girl has remained in her attachment to her father - that is, in the Oedipus complex - her choice is made according to the paternal type. Since, when she turned from her mother to her father, the hostility of her ambivalent relation remained with her mother, a choice of 
this kind should guarantee a happy marriage. But very o ften the outcome is of a kind that presents a 
general threat to such a settlement of the conflict due to ambivalence. The hostility that has been left 
behind follows in the train of the positive attachment and spreads over on to the new object. The woman’s 
husband, who to begin with inherited from her father, becomes after a time her mother’s heir as well. So it 
may easily happen that the second half of a woman’s life may be filled by the struggle against her husband, just as the shorter first half was filled by her rebellion against her mother. When this reaction has been lived 
through, a second marriage may easily turn out very much more satisfying. Another alteration in a woman’s 
nature, for which lovers are unprepared, may occur in a marriage after the first child is born. Under the influence of a woman’s becoming a mother herself, an identification with her own mother may be revived, against which she had striven up till the time of her marriage, and this may attract all the available libido to 
itself, so that the compulsion to repeat reproduces an unhappy marriage between her parents. The 
difference in a mother’s reaction to the birth of a s on or a daughter shows that the old factor of lack of a 
penis has even now not lost its strength. A mother is only brought unlimited satisfaction by her relation to a 
son; this is altogether the most perfect, the most free from ambivalence of all human relationships. A 
mother can transfer to her son the ambition which she has been obliged to suppress in herself, and she can expect from him the satisfaction of all that has been left over in her of her masculinity complex. Even a 
marriage is not made secure until the wife has succeeded in making her husband her child as well and in 
acting as a mother to him.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4736  
 
   A woman’s identification with her mother allows us to distinguish two strata: the pre-Oedipus one which 
rests on her affectionate attachment to her mother and takes her as a model, and the later one from the 
Oedipus complex which seeks to get rid of her mother and take her place with her father. We are no doubt justified in saying that much of both of them is left over for the future and that neither of them is adequately 
surmounted in the course of development. But the phase of  the affectionate pre-Oedipus attachment is the 
decisive one for a woman’s future: during it preparations are made for the acquisition of the characteristics with which she will later fulfil her role in the sexual function and perform her invaluable social tasks. It is in this identification too that she acquires her attractiveness to a man, whose Oedipus attachment to his 
mother it kindles into passion. How often it happens, how ever, that it is only his son who obtains what he 
himself aspired to! One gets an impression that a man’s love and a woman’s are a phase apart 
psychologically. 
   The fact that women must be regarded as having little sense of justice is no doubt related to the 
predominance of envy in their mental life; for the demand for justice is a modification of envy and lays down 
the condition subject to which one can put envy aside. We also regard women as weaker in their social interests and as having less capacity for sublimating their instincts than men. The former is no doubt 
derived from the dissocial quality which unquestionably characterizes all sexual relations. Lovers find 
sufficiency in each other, and families too resist inclusion in more comprehensive associations. The aptitude for sublimation is subject to the greatest individual variations. On the other hand I cannot help 
mentioning an impression that we are constantly rece iving during analytic practice. A man of about thirty 
strikes us as a youthful, somewhat unformed individual, whom we expect to make powerful use of the possibilities for development opened up to him by analysis. A woman of the same age, however, often 
frightens us by her psychical rigidity and unchangeability. Her libido has taken up final positions and seems 
incapable of exchanging them for others. There are no paths open to further development; it is as though the whole process had already run its course and remains thenceforward insusceptible to influence - as though, indeed, the difficult development to femininity had exhausted the possibilities of the person 
concerned. As therapists we lament this state of things, even if we succeed in putting an end to our 
patient’s ailment by doing away with her neurotic conflict.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4737  
 
 
   That is all I had to say to you about femininity. It is certainly incomplete and fragmentary and does not 
always sound friendly. But do not forget that I have only been describing women in so far as their nature is determined by their sexual function. It is true that that influence extends very far; but we do not overlook the fact that an individual woman may be a human being in other respects as well. If you want to know more 
about femininity, enquire from your own experiences of life, or turn to the poets, or wait until science can 
give you deeper and more coherent information. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4738  
 
LECTURE XXXIV 
 
EXPLANATIONS, APPLICATIONS AND ORIENTATIONS 
 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN , - Perhaps you will allow me for once, as a relief from the dry tone of these 
lectures, to talk to you about some things which have very little theoretical significance but which concern 
you closely in so far as you are friendlily disposed to psycho-analysis. Let us imagine, for instance, that in 
your leisure hours you take up a German, English or American novel, in which you expect to find an 
account of contemporary people and society. After a few pages you come upon a first comment on psycho-
analysis and soon afterwards upon others, even though the context does not seem to call for them. You must not imagine that it is a question of applying depth-psychology to a better understanding of the 
characters in the book or of their actions - though, incidentally, there are other and more serious works in 
which an attempt of that kind is in fact made. No, these are for the most part facetious remarks intended by 
the author to display his wide reading and intellectual superiority. Nor will you always form an impression that he really knows what he is talking about. Again, you may go as a recreation to a social gathering - and 
this need not necessarily happen in Vienna. After a short time the conversation turns upon psycho-analysis 
and you will hear the greatest variety of people passing their judgement on it, mostly in voices of unwavering certainty. It is quite usual for the judgement to be contemptuous or often slanderous or at least, 
once again, facetious. If you are so imprudent as to betray the fact that you know something about the 
subject, they fall upon you with one accord, ask for information and explanations and soon convince you that all these severe judgements had been arrived at wit hout any basis of knowledge, that scarcely any of 
these critics had ever opened an analytic book or, if they had, had gone beyond the first resistance aroused by their contact with this new material.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4739  
 
   You may perhaps expect an introduction to psycho-analysis to give you instructions, too, on what 
arguments you should use to correct these obvious errors about analysis, what books you should 
recommend to give more accurate information, or even what examples you should bring up in the discussion from your reading or experience in order to alter the company’s attitude. I must beg you to do none of this. It would be useless. The best plan would be for you to conceal your superior knowledge 
altogether. If that is no longer possible, limit yourself to saying that, so far as you can make out, psycho-
analysis is a special branch of knowledge, very hard to understand and to form an opinion on, which is concerned with very serious things, so that a few jokes will not bring one to close quarters with it - and that 
it would be better to find some other plaything for social entertainment. Nor, of course, will you join in 
attempts at interpretation, if unwary people repeat their dreams; and you will resist the temptation to curry favour for analysis by retailing reports of its cures. 
   But you may raise the question of why these people - both the ones who write books and the 
conversationalists - behave so badly; and you may incline to the view that the responsibility for this lies not only on them but also on psycho-analysis. I think so too. What you come upon as prejudice in literature and society is an after-effect of an earlier judgement - the judgement, namely, that was formed upon the young 
psycho-analysis by the representatives of official science. I once complained of this in a historical account I 
wrote, and I shall not do so again - perhaps that once wa s too often - but it is a fact that there was no 
violation of logic, and no violation of propriety and good taste, to which the scientific opponents of psycho-
analysis did not give way at that time. The situation recalled what was actually put in practice in the Middle 
Ages when an evil-doer, or even a mere political opponent, was put in the pillory and given over to maltreatment by the mob. You may not realize clearly, perhaps, how far upwards in our society mob-
characteristics extend, and what misconduct people will be guilty of when they feel themselves part of a 
crowd and relieved of personal responsibility. At the beginning of that time I was more or less alone and I 
soon saw that there was no future in polemics but that it was equally senseless to lament and to invoke the help of kindlier spirits, for there were not courts to which such appeals could be made. So I took another 
road. I made a first application of psycho-analysis by explaining to myself that this behaviour of the crowd 
was a manifestation of the same resistance which I had to struggle against in individual patients. I refrained from polemics myself and influenced my adherents, when little by little they appeared, in the same 
direction. This procedure was the right one. The interdict which lay upon psycho-analysis in those days has 
been lifted since then. But, just as an abandoned faith survives  as a superstition, just as a theory which has 
been given up by science continues to exist as a popular belief, so the original outlawing of psycho-analysis 
by scientific circles persists to-day in the facetious contempt of the laymen who write books or make 
conversation. So this will no longer surprise you.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4740  
 
   But you must not expect to hear the glad tidings that the struggle about analysis is over and has ended in 
its recognition as a science and its admission as a subject for instruction at universities. There is no 
question of that. The struggle continues, though in more po lite forms. What is also new is that a sort of 
buffer-layer has formed in scientific society between analysis and its opponents. This consists of people who allow the validity of some portions of analysis and admit as much, subject to the most entertaining 
qualifications, but who on the other hand reject other porti ons of it, a fact which they cannot proclaim too 
loudly. It is not easy to divine what determines their choice in this. It seems to depend on personal 
sympathies. One person will take objection to sexuality, another to the unconscious; what seems 
particularly unpopular is the fact of symbolism. Though the structure of psycho-analysis is unfinished, it 
nevertheless presents, even to-day, a unity from wh ich elements cannot be broken off at the caprice of 
whoever comes along: but these eclectics seem to disregard this. I have never had the impression that 
these half- or quarter-adherents based their rejection on an examination of the facts. Some distinguished 
men, too, are included in this category. They, to be sure, are excused by the fact that their time and their interest belong to other things - to those things, namely, in mastering which they have achieved so much. But in that case would they not do better to suspend their judgement instead of taking sides so decisively? 
With one of these great men I once succeeded in effecting a rapid conversion. He was a world-famous 
critic, who had followed the spiritual currents of the time with benevolent understanding and prophetic penetration. I only came to know him when he was past his eightieth year; but he was still enchanting in his 
talk. You will easily guess whom I mean. Nor was it I who introduced the subject of psycho-analysis. It was 
he who did so, by comparing himself with me in the most modest fashion. ‘I am only a literary man,’ he said, ‘but you are a natural scientist and discoverer. However, there is one thing I must say to you: I have never 
had sexual feelings towards my mother.’ ‘But there is no need at all for you to have known them,’ was my 
reply; ‘to grown-up people those are unconscious feelings.’ ‘Oh! so that’s  what you think!’ he said with relief, 
and pressed my hand. We went on talking together on the best of terms for another few hours. I heard later that in the few remaining years of his life he often spoke of analysis in a friendly way and was pleased at 
being able to use a word that was new to him - ‘repression’. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4741  
 
 
   There is a common saying that we should learn from our enemies. I confess I have never succeeded in 
doing so; but I thought all the same that it might be in structive for you if I undertook a review of all the 
reproaches and objections which the opponents of psycho-analysis have raised against it, and if I went on to point out the injustices and offences against logic which could so easily be revealed in them. But ‘on 
second thoughts’ I told myself that it would not be at all interesting but would become tedious and 
distressing and would be precisely what I have been so carefully avoiding all these years. So you must forgive me if I pursue this path no further and if I spare you the judgements of our so-called scientific 
opponents. After all it is nearly always a question of peopl e whose one qualification is the impartiality which 
they have preserved by keeping at a distance from t he experiences of psycho-analysis. But I know there 
are other cases in which you will not let me off so lightly. ‘Nevertheless’, you will tell me, ‘there are such a number of people to whom your last remark does not apply. They have not evaded analytic experience, 
they have analysed patients and have perhaps been analys ed themselves; for a time they have even been 
your collaborators. Yet they have arrived at other views and theories on the basis of which they have 
seceded from you and founded independent schools of psycho-analysis. You ought to throw some light for 
us on the possibility and significance of these secessionist movements which have been so frequent in the 
history of analysis.’  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4742  
 
   Well, I will try to do so; but only in brief, since they contribute less to an understanding of analysis than 
you might expect. I feel sure you will be thinking in the first place of Adler’s ‘Individual Psychology’, which, 
in America for instance, is regarded as a line of thought collateral with our psycho-analysis and on a par 
with it and which is regularly mentioned alongside of it. Actually, Individual Psychology has very little to do with psycho-analysis but, as a result of certain historical circumstances, leads a kind of parasitic existence 
at its expense. The determinants which we have attributed to this group of opponents apply to the founders 
of Individual Psychology only to a limited extent. Its very name is inappropriate and seems to have been the product of embarrassment. We cannot allow the legitimate use of the term as an antithesis to ‘group 
psychology’ to be interfered with; moreover, our own activity is concerned for the most part and primarily 
with the psychology of human individuals. I shall not enter to-day upon an objective criticism of Adler’s Individual Psychology; there is no place for it in the plan of these introductory lectures. Besides, I have 
already attempted it once, and feel no temptation to change anything in what I said then. I will, however, 
illustrate the impression his views produce by a small episode dating from the years before analysis.    In the neighbourhood of the little Moravian town in which I was born, and which I left when I was a three-year-old child, there is a modest health-resort, prettily situated in the woods. During my schooldays I went 
there several times in the holidays. Some twenty years later the illness of a near relative was the occasion 
for my visiting the place again. In the course of a conversation with the physician attached to the spa, who had attended my relative, I enquired among other things about his relations with the peasants - Slovaks, I 
believe - who constituted his whole clientèle during the winter. He told me that his medical practice 
proceeded as follows. In his consulting hours the patients came into his room and stood in a row. One after 
another stepped forward and described his complaint: he had backache or pains in his stomach or had tired 
legs, and so on. The doctor then examined him and, after satisfying himself as to what was the matter, 
called out the diagnosis, which was the same in every case. He translated the word to me; it meant approximately ‘bewitched’. I asked in astonishment whether the peasants made no objection to his verdict being the same with every patient. ‘Oh, no!’ he replied, ‘they are very pleased with it: it is what they 
expected. Each of them, as he went back to his plac e in the row, showed the others by looks and gestures 
that I was a fellow who understood things.’ Little did I guess at the time in what circumstances I should 
come across an analogous situation once again. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4743  
 
   For, whether a man is a homosexual or a necrophilic, a hysteric suffering from anxiety, an obsessional 
neurotic cut off from society, or a raving lunatic, the ‘Individual Psychologist’ of the Adlerian school will 
declare that the impelling motive of his condition is t hat he wishes to assert himself, to overcompensate for 
his inferiority, to remain ‘on top’, to pass from the feminine to the masculine line. In my young student days we used to hear something very much the same in the out-patients’ department when a case of hysteria 
was introduced: hysterical patients, we were told, produce their symptoms to make themselves interesting, 
to draw attention to themselves. It is a remarkabl e thing how these ancient pieces of wisdom keep on 
cropping up. But even at that time this fragment of psychology did not seem to cover the riddle of hysteria. 
It left unexplained, for instance, why the patients used no other methods for attaining their purpose. There 
must, of course, be something  correct in this theory of the ‘Individual Psychologists’: a small particle is 
taken for the whole. The self-preservative instinct will try to profit by every situation; the ego will seek to turn 
even illness to its advantage. In psycho-analysis this is known as the ‘secondary gain from illness’. Though, indeed, when we think of the facts of masochism, of the unconscious need for punishment and of neurotic self-injury, which make plausible the hypothesis of there being instinctual impulses that run contrary to self-preservation, we even feel shaken in our belief in the general validity of the commonplace truth on which 
the theoretical structure of Individual Psychology is erected. But a theory such as this is bound to be very 
welcome to the great mass of the people, a theory which recognizes no complications, which introduces no new concepts that are hard to grasp, which knows nothing of the unconscious, which gets rid at a single 
blow of the universally oppressive problem of sexuality and which restricts itself to the discovery of the artifices by which people seek to make life easy. For the mass of the people themselves take things easily: they call for no more than a single reason by way of explanation, they do not thank science for its 
diffuseness, they want to have simple solutions and to know that problems are solved. When we consider 
how very far Individual Psychology goes in meeting these demands, we cannot suppress the recollection of a sentence in Wallenstein: 
 
   Wär’ der Gedank’ nicht so verwünscht gescheidt,    Man wär’ versucht, ihn herzlich dumm zu nennen.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4744  
 
   Criticism from specialist circles, which is so relentless against psycho-analysis, has in general handled 
Individual Psychology with kid gloves. It is true that in America one of the most highly respected 
psychiatrists published a paper against Adler under the title ‘Enough’, in which he gave energetic expression to his boredom at the ‘compulsion to repeat’ of Individual Psychology. If others have treated it far more amiably, no doubt their antagonism to analysis has had much to do with it. 
   I need not say much about other schools which have branched off from our psycho-analysis. The fact that 
they have done so cannot be used either for or against the validity of psycho-analytic theories. You have 
only to think of the strong emotional factors that make it hard for many people to fit themselves in with 
others or to subordinate themselves, and of the still greater difficulty justly insisted on by the dictum ‘Quot 
capita tot sensus’. When the differences of opi nion had gone beyond a certain point, the most sensible 
thing was to part and thereafter to proceed along our different ways - especially when the theoretical 
divergence involved a change in practical procedure. Suppos e, for instance, that an analyst attaches little 
value to the influence of the patient’s personal past and looks for the causation of neuroses exclusively in 
present-day motives and in expectations of the future. In that case he will also neglect the analysis of 
childhood; he will have to adopt an entirely different technique and will have to make up for the omission of 
the events from the analysis of childhood by increasing his didactic influence and by directly indicating 
certain particular aims in life. We for our part will then say: ‘This may be a school of wisdom; but it is no longer analysis.’ Or someone else may arrive at the view that the experience of anxiety at birth sows the 
seed of all later neurotic disturbances. It may thereupon seem to him legitimate to restrict analysis to the 
consequences of this single impression and to promise therapeutic success from a treatment lasting from three to four months. As you will observe, I have chosen two examples which start from diametrically 
opposite premisses. It is an almost universal characteristic of these ‘secessionist movements’ that each of 
them takes hold of one fragment out of the wealth of themes in psycho-analysis and makes itself independent on the basis of this seizure - selecting the instinct for mastery, for instance, or ethical conflict, or the mother, or genitality, and so on. If it appears to you that secessions of this sort are already more 
numerous to-day in the history of psycho-analysis than in other intellectual movements, I am not sure that I 
should agree with you. If it is the case, the responsibility must be laid on the intimate relations which exist in 
psycho-analysis between theoretical views and therapeutic treatment. Mere differences of opinion would be 
tolerable for far longer. People like accusing us psycho-analysts of intolerance. The only manifestation of 
this ugly characteristic has been precisely our parting from those who think differently from us. No other harm has been done to them. On the contrary, they have fallen on their feet, and are better off than they 
were before. For by their separation they have usua lly freed themselves of one of the burdens which weigh 
us down - the odium of infantile sexuality, perhaps, or the absurdity of symbolism - and are regarded by 
their environment as passably respectable, which is still not true of those of us who are left behind. 
Moreover, apart from one notable exception, it was they who excluded themselves. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4745  
 
   What further claims do you make in the name of tolerance? That when someone has uttered an opinion 
which we regard as completely false we should say to him: ‘Thank you very much for having given voice to 
this contradiction. You are guarding us against the danger of complacency and are giving us an opportunity of showing the Americans that we are really as "broad-minded" as they always wish. To be sure, we do not believe a word of what you are saying, but that makes no difference. Probably you are just as right as we 
are. After all, who can possibly know who is right? In spite of our antagonism, pray allow us to represent 
your point of view in our publications. We hope that you will be kind enough in exchange to find a place for our views which you deny.’ In the future, when the misuse of Einstein’s relativity has been entirely 
achieved, this will obviously become the regular custom in  scientific affairs. For the moment, it is true, we 
have not gone quite so far. We restrict ourselves, in the old fashion, to putting forward only our own 
convictions, we expose ourselves to the risk of error because it cannot be guarded against, and we reject 
what is in contradiction to us. We have made plentiful use in psycho-analysis of the right to change our opinions if we think we have found something better.     One of the first applications of psycho-analysis was to teach us to understand the opposition offered to us 
by our contemporaries because we practised psycho-analysis. Other applications, of an objective nature, 
may claim a more general interest. Our first purpose, of course, was to understand the disorders of the human mind, because a remarkable experience had shown that here understanding and cure almost 
coincide, that a traversable road leads from the one to the other. And for a long time it was our only purpose. Then, however, we perceived the close relations, the internal identity indeed, between pathological processes and what are known as normal ones. Psycho-analysis became a depth-psychology; 
and, since nothing that men make or do is understandable without the co-operation of psychology, the 
applications of psycho-analysis to numerous fields of knowledge, in particular to those of the mental sciences, came about of their own accord, pushed their way to the front and called for ventilation. These tasks unluckily came up against obstacles which, rooted as they were in the circumstances, have not yet 
been overcome even to-day. An application of th is kind presupposes specialized knowledge which an 
analyst does not possess, while those who possess it, the specialists, know nothing of analysis and 
perhaps want to know nothing. The result has been that analysts, as amateurs with an equipment of greater 
or less adequacy, often hastily scraped together, have made excursions into such fields of knowledge as 
mythology, the history of civilization, ethnology, t he science of religion and so on. They were no better 
treated by the experts resident in those fields t han are trespassers in general: their methods and their 
findings, in so far as they attracted attention, were in the first instance rejected. But these conditions are constantly improving, and in every region there is  a growing number of people who study psycho-analysis 
in order to make use of it in their special subject, and in order, as colonists, to replace the pioneers. Here 
we may expect a rich harvest of new discoveries. Applications of analysis are always confirmations of it as 
well. There, too, where scientific work is further removed from practical activity, the inevitable differences of opinion will no doubt take a less embittered form.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4746  
 
   I feel a strong temptation to conduct you through all the applications of psycho-analysis to the mental 
sciences. They are things worth knowing by anyone with intellectual interests; and not to hear about 
abnormality and illness for a time would be a well-deserved relaxation. But I must renounce the idea: it would once more carry us outside the framework of these lectures and, I must honestly admit, I should not be equal to the task. It is true that in a few of these regions I myself took the first step; but to-day I no longer 
embrace the whole field, and I should have to do a great deal of studying in order to master what has been 
accomplished since my beginnings. Any of you who are disappointed by my refusal may make up for it in the pages of our periodical Imago, which is designed to cover the non-medical applications of analysis. 
    But there is one topic which I cannot pass over so easily - not, however, because I understand particularly much about it or have contributed very much to it. Quite the contrary: I have scarcely concerned myself with 
it at all. I must mention it because it is so exceedingly important, so rich in hopes for the future, perhaps the 
most important of all the activities of analysis. What I am thinking of is the application of psycho-analysis to education, to the upbringing of the next generation. I am glad that I am at least able to say that my daughter, Anna Freud, has made this study her life-work and has in that way compensated for my neglect. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4747  
 
   The road that led to this application is easily traced. When in the treatment of an adult neurotic we 
followed up the determinants of his symptoms, we were regularly led back to his early childhood. A 
knowledge of the later aetiological factors was not sufficient either for understanding the case or for producing a therapeutic effect. We were therefore compelled to make ourselves acquainted with the psychical peculiarities of childhood; we learnt a quantit y of things which could not have been learnt except 
through analysis, and we were able to put right many opinions that were generally held about childhood. We recognized that particular importance attached to the first years of childhood - up to the age of five, perhaps - for several reasons. Firstly, because those years include the early efflorescence of sexuality 
which leaves behind it decisive instigating factors for the sexual life of maturity. Secondly, because the 
impressions of this period impinge upon an immature and feeble ego, and act upon it like traumas. The ego cannot fend off the emotional storms which they provoke in any way except by repression and in this 
manner acquires in childhood all its dispositions to later illnesses and functional disturbances. We realized 
that the difficulty of childhood lies in the fact that in a short span of time a child has to appropriate the results of a cultural evolution which stretches over thousands of years, including the acquisition of control 
over his instincts and adaptation to society - or at least the first beginnings of these two. He can only 
achieve a part of this modification through his own development; much must be imposed on him by 
education. We are not surprised that children often carry out this task very imperfectly. During these early times many of them pass through states that may be put on a par with neuroses - and this is certainly so in 
the case of all those who produce manifest illnesses later on. In some children the neurotic illness does not 
wait till maturity but breaks out already in childhood and gives parents and doctors plenty of trouble.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4748  
 
   We had no misgivings over applying analytic treatment to children who either exhibited unambiguous 
neurotic symptoms or who were on the road to an unfavourable development of character. The 
apprehension expressed by opponents of analysis that t he child would be injured by it proved unfounded. 
What we gained from these undertakings was that we were able to confirm on the living subject what we had inferred (from historical documents, as it were) in the case of adults. But the gain for the children was 
also very satisfactory. It turned out that a child is a very favourable subject for analytic therapy; the results 
are thorough and lasting. The technique of treatment worked out for adults must, of course, be largely altered for children. A child is psychologically a different object from an adult. As yet he possesses no 
super-ego, the method of free association does not carry far with him, transference (since the real parents 
are still on the spot) plays a different part. The internal resistances against which we struggle in adults are replaced for the most part in children by external difficulties. If the parents make themselves vehicles of the 
resistance, the aim of the analysis - and even the analysis itself - is often imperilled. Hence it is often 
necessary to combine with a child’s analysis a certain amount of analytic influencing of his parents. On the 
other hand, the inevitable deviations of analyses of ch ildren from those of adults are diminished by the 
circumstance that some of our patients have retained so  many infantile character traits that the analyst 
(once again adapting himself to his subject) cannot avoid making use with them of certain of the techniques of child-analysis. It has automatically happened that child-analysis has become the domain of women analysts, and no doubt this will remain true. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4749  
 
   The recognition that most of our children pass through a neurotic phase in the course of their 
development carries with it the germ of a hygienic challenge. The question may be raised whether it would 
not be expedient to come to a child’s help with an analysis even if he shows no signs of a disturbance, as a 
measure for safeguarding his health, just as to-day we inoculate healthy children against diphtheria without waiting to see if they fall ill of it. The discussion of this question has only an academic interest at present, 
but I may venture to consider it here. The mere suggestion would seem to the great bulk of our 
contemporaries to be a monstrous outrage, and in view of the attitude towards analysis of most people in a parental position any hope of putting through such an idea must be abandoned for the time being. 
Prophylaxis such as this against neurotic illness, which would probably be very effective, also presupposes 
a quite other constitution of society. The watchword for the application of psycho-analysis to education is to be found to-day elsewhere. Let us make ourselves clear as to what the first task of education is. The child 
must learn to control his instincts. It is impossible to give him liberty to carry out all his impulses without 
restriction. To do so would be a very instructive experiment for child-psychologists; but life would be impossible for the parents and the children themselves would suffer grave damage, which would show itself partly at once and partly in later years. Accordingly, education must inhibit, forbid and suppress, and this it 
has abundantly seen to in all periods of history. But we have learnt from analysis that precisely this 
suppression of instincts involves the risk of neurotic illness. As you will remember, we have examined in detail how this occurs. Thus education has to find its way between the Scylla of non-interference and the 
Charybdis of frustration. Unless this problem is entirely insoluble, an optimum must be discovered which will enable education to achieve the most and damage the least. It will therefore be a matter of deciding how much to forbid, at what times and by what means. And in addition we have to take into account the fact 
that the objects of our educational influence have very di fferent innate constitutional dispositions, so that it 
is quite impossible that the same educational procedure can be equally good for all children. A moment’s 
reflection tells us that hitherto education has fulfilled its task very badly and has done children great damage. If it discovers the optimum and carries out its task ideally, it can hope to wipe out one of the 
factors in the aetiology of falling ill - the influence of the accidental traumas of childhood. It cannot in any 
case get rid of the other factor - the power of an insubordinate instinctual constitution. If now we consider the difficult problems that confront the educator - how he has to recognize the child’s constitutional 
individuality, to infer from small indications what is going on in his immature mind, to give him the right amount of love and yet to maintain an effective degree of authority - we shall tell ourselves that the only appropriate preparation for the profession of educator is a thorough psycho-analytic training. It would be 
best that he should have been analysed himself, for, when all is said and done, it is impossible to assimilate 
analysis without experiencing it personally. The analysis of teachers and educators seems to be a more efficacious prophylactic measure than the analysis of children themselves, and there are less difficulties in 
the way of putting it into practice. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4750  
 
   We may mention, though only as an incidental consideration, an indirect way in which the upbringing of 
children may be helped by analysis and which may with time acquire a greater influence. Parents who have 
themselves experienced an analysis and owe much to it, including an insight into the faults of their own upbringing, will treat their children with better understanding and will spare them much of what they themselves were not spared. 
   Parallel with the efforts of analysts to influence education, other investigations are being made into the 
origin and prevention of delinquency and crime. Here again I am only opening the door for you and showing you the rooms that lie beyond it, without leading you inside. I am certain that if you remain loyal to your 
interest in psycho-analysis you will be able to learn much that is new and valuable on these subjects. I must 
not, however, leave the topic of education without referring to one particular aspect of it. It has been said - and no doubt justly - that every education has a partisan aim, that it endeavours to bring the child into line 
with the established order of society, without considering how valuable or how stable that order may be in itself. If one is convinced of the defects in our present social arrangements, education with a psycho-analytic alignment cannot justifiably be put at their se rvice as well: it must be given another and higher aim, 
liberated from the prevailing demands of society. In my opinion, however, this argument is out of place 
here. Such a demand goes beyond the legitimate function of analysis. In the same way, it is not the 
business of a doctor who is called in to treat a case of pneumonia to concern himself with whether the patient is an honest man or a suicide or a criminal, whether he deserves to remain alive or whether one 
ought to wish him to. This other aim which it is desired to give to education will also be a partisan one, and 
it is not the affair of an analyst to decide between the parties. I am leaving entirely on one side the fact that psycho-analysis would be refused any influence on education if  it admitted to intentions inconsistent with 
the established social order. Psycho-analytic education will be taking an uninvited responsibility on itself if it proposes to mould its pupils into rebels. It will have played its part if it sends them away as healthy and efficient as possible. It itself contains enough revolutionary factors to ensure that no one educated by it will in later life take the side of reaction and suppression. It is even my opinion that revolutionary children are 
not desirable from any point of view. 
    I propose further, Ladies and Gentlemen, to say a few words to you about psycho-analysis as a form of 
therapy. I discussed the theoretical side of this ques tion fifteen years ago and I cannot formulate it in any 
other manner to-day; I have now to tell you of our experience during this interval. As you know, psycho-
analysis originated as a method of treatment; it has far outgrown this, but it has not abandoned its home-
ground and it is still linked to its contact with patients for increasing its depth and for its further 
development. The accumulated impressions from which we derive our theories could be arrived at in no other way. The failures we meet with as therapists are constantly setting us new tasks and the demands of 
real life are an effective guard against an overgrowth of the speculation which we cannot after all do without 
in our work. I have already discussed long ago the means used by psycho-analysis in helping patients, when it does help them, and the method by which it does so; to-day I shall enquire how much it achieves. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4751  
 
   You are perhaps aware that I have never been a therapeutic enthusiast; there is no danger of my 
misusing this lecture by indulging in eulogies. I would rather say too little than too much. During the period 
at which I was the only analyst, people who were ostensibly friendly to my ideas used to say to me: ‘That’s all very nice and clever; but show me a case that you have cured by analysis.’ This was one of the many formulas which in the course of time have succ eeded one another in performing the function of pushing the 
uncomfortable novelty aside. To-day it is as out of date as many others: the analyst, too, has a heap of letters in his files from grateful patients who have been cured. The analogy does not stop at that. Psycho-analysis is really a method of treatment like others. It has its triumphs and its defeats, its difficulties, its 
limitations, its indications. At one time a complaint was made against analysis that it was not to be taken 
seriously as a treatment since it did not dare to issue any statistics of its successes. Since then, the Psycho-Analytic Institute in Berlin, which was founded by Dr. Max Eitingon, has published a statement of its 
results during its first ten years. Its therapeutic successes give grounds neither for boasting nor for being ashamed. But statistics of that kind are in general uninstructive; the material worked upon is so heterogeneous that only very large numbers would show anything. It is wiser to examine one’s individual experiences. And here I should like to add that I do not think our cures can compete with those of Lourdes. 
There are so many more people who believe in the miracles of the Blessed Virgin than in the existence of 
the unconscious. If we turn to mundane competitors, we must compare psycho-analytic treatment with other kinds of psychotherapy. To-day organic physical methods of treating neurotic states need scarcely be 
mentioned. Analysis as a psycho-therapeutic procedure does not stand in opposition to other methods used 
in this specialized branch of medicine; it does not diminish their value nor exclude them. There is no 
theoretical inconsistency in a doctor who likes to call himself a psychotherapist using analysis on his 
patients alongside of any other method of treatment a ccording to the peculiarities of the case and the 
favourable or unfavourable external circumstances. It is in fact technique that necessitates the 
specialization in medical practice. Thus in the same way surgery and orthopaedics were obliged to separate. Psycho-analytic activity is arduous and exac ting; it cannot well be handled like a pair of glasses 
that one puts on for reading and takes off when one goes for a walk. As a rule psycho-analysis possesses a doctor either entirely or not at all. Those psychotherapists who make use of analysis among other methods, occasionally, do not to my knowledge stand on firm anal ytic ground; they have not accepted the whole of 
analysis but have watered it down - have drawn it s fangs, perhaps; they cannot be counted as analysts. 
This is, I think, to be regretted. But co-operation in medical practice between an analyst and a psychotherapist who restricts himself to other techniques would serve quite a useful purpose. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4752  
 
   Compared with the other psychotherapeutic procedures psycho-analysis is beyond any doubt the most 
powerful. It is just and fair, too, that this should be so for it is also the most laborious and time-consuming; it 
would not be used on slight cases. In suitable cases it is possible by its means to get rid of disturbances 
and bring about changes for which in pre-analytic times one would not have ventured to hope. But it has its very appreciable limits. The therapeutic ambition of some of my adherents has made the greatest efforts to 
overcome these obstacles so that every sort of neurotic disorder might be curable by psycho-analysis. They 
have endeavoured to compress the work of analysis into a shorter duration, to intensify transference so that it may be able to overcome any resistance, to unite other forms of influence with it so as to compel a cure. 
These efforts are certainly praiseworthy, but, in my opinion, they are vain. They bring with them, too, a 
danger of being oneself forced away from analysis and drawn into a boundless course of experimentation. The expectation that every neurotic phenomenon can be cured may, I suspect, be derived from the 
layman’s belief that the neuroses are something quite unnecessary which have no right whatever to exist. 
Whereas in fact they are severe, constitutionally fixed illnesses, which rarely restrict themselves to only a few attacks but persist as a rule over long periods or throughout life. Our analytic experience that they can be extensively influenced, if the historical precipitating causes and accidental auxiliary factors of the illness 
can be dealt with, has led us to neglect the constitutional factor in our therapeutic practice, and in any case 
we can do nothing about it; but in theory we ought always to bear it in mind. The radical inaccessibility of the psychoses to analytic treatment should, in view of their close relationship to the neuroses, restrict our 
pretensions in regard to these latter. The therapeutic effectiveness of psycho-analysis remains cramped by 
a number of weighty and scarcely assailable factors. In the case of children, where one might count on the greatest successes, the difficulties are the external ones connected with their relation to their parents, 
though these difficulties are after all a necessary part of being a child. In the case of adults the difficulties 
arise in the first instance from two factors: the amount of psychical rigidity present and the form of the illness with all that that covers in the way of deeper determinants.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4753  
 
   The first of these factors is often unjustly overlooked. However great may be the plasticity of mental life 
and the possibility of reviving old conditions, not everything can be brought to life again. Some changes 
seem to be definitive and correspond to scars formed when a process has run its course. On other occasions one has an impression of a general stiffening of mental life; the psychical processes, to which one could very well indicate other paths, seem incapable of abandoning the old ones. But perhaps this is 
the same thing as what I mentioned just now, only looked at differently. All too often one seems to see that 
it is only the treatment’s lack of the necessary mo tive force that prevents one from bringing the change 
about. One particular dependent relation, one special instinctual component, is too powerful in comparison 
with the opposing forces that we are able to mobilize. This is quite generally true with the psychoses. We 
understand them well enough to know the point at which the levers should be applied, but they would not be able to move the weight. It is here, indeed, that hope for the future lies: the possibility that our 
knowledge of the operation of the hormones (you know  what they are) may give us the means of 
successfully combating the quantitative factors of the illnesses: but we are far from that to-day. I realize that 
the uncertainty in all these matters is a constant instigation towards perfecting analysis and in particular the transference. Beginners in analysis especially are left in doubt in case of a failure whether they should 
blame the peculiarities of the case or their own clumsy handling of the therapeutic procedure. But, as I have 
said already, I do not think much can be achieved by efforts in this direction.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4754  
 
   The second limitation upon analytic successes is given by the form of the illness. You know already that 
the field of application of analytic therapy lies in the transference neuroses - phobias, hysteria, obsessional 
neurosis - and further, abnormalities of character which have been developed in place of these illnesses. Everything differing from these, narcissistic and psychotic conditions, is unsuitable to a greater or less extent. It would be entirely legitimate to guard against failures by carefully excluding such cases. This 
precaution would lead to a great improvement in the statistics of analysis. There is, however, a pitfall here. 
Our diagnoses are very often made only after the event. They resemble the Scottish King’s test for identifying witches that I read about in Victor Hugo. This king declared that he was in possession of an 
infallible method of recognizing a witch. He had the women stewed in a cauldron of boiling water and then 
tasted the broth. Afterwards he was able to say: ‘That was a witch’, or ‘No, that was not one.’ It is the same with us, except that we are the sufferers. We cannot judge the patient who comes for treatment (or, in the 
same way, the candidate who comes for training) till we have studied him analytically for a few weeks or months. We are in fact buying a pig in a poke. The patient brings along indefinite general ailments which do 
not admit of a conclusive diagnosis. After this period of testing it may turn out that the case is an unsuitable one. If so we send him away if he is a candidate, or c ontinue the trial a little longer if he is a patient on the 
chance that we may yet see things in a more favourable light. The patient has his revenge by adding to our list of failures, and the rejected candidate does so perhaps, if he is paranoid, by writing books on psycho-analysis himself. As you see, our precautions have been of no avail. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4755  
 
   I am afraid these detailed discussions are exhausting your interest. But I should be still more sorry if you 
were to think it is my intention to lower your opinion of psycho-analysis as a therapy. Perhaps I really made 
a clumsy start. For I wanted to do the opposite: to excuse the therapeutic limitations of analysis by pointing out their inevitability. With the same aim in view I turn to another point: the reproach against analytic treatment that it takes a disproportionately long time. On this it must be said that psychical changes do in 
fact only take place slowly; if they occur rapidly, suddenl y, that is a bad sign. It is true that the treatment of a 
fairly severe neurosis may easily extend over several years; but consider, in case of success, how long the 
illness would have lasted. A decade, probably, for every year of treatment: the illness, that is to say (as we 
see so often in untreated cases), would not have ended at all. In some cases we have reasons for 
resuming an analysis many years afterwards. Life had developed fresh pathological reactions to fresh precipitating causes; but in the meantime our patient had been well. The first analysis had not in fact 
brought to light all his pathological dispositions, and it was natural for the analysis to have been stopped 
when success was achieved. There are also severely handicapped people who are kept under analytic supervision all through their lives and are taken back into analysis from time to time. But these people would otherwise have been altogether incapable of existence and we must feel glad that they can be kept 
on their feet by this piecemeal and recurrent treatment. The analysis of character disorders also calls for 
long periods of treatment; but it is often successful; and do you know of any other therapy with which such 
a task could even be approached? Therapeutic ambition may feel unsatisfied by such results; but we have 
learnt from the example of tuberculosis and lupus that success can only be obtained when the treatment 
has been adapted to the characteristics of the illness.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4756  
 
 
   I have told you that psycho-analysis began as a method of treatment; but I did not want to commend it to 
your interest as a method of treatment but on account of  the truths it contains, on account of the information 
it gives us about what concerns human beings most of all - their own nature - and on account of the 
connections it discloses between the most different of their activities. As a method of treatment it is one 
among many, though, to be sure, primus inter pares . If it was without therapeutic value it would not have 
been discovered, as it was, in connection with sick people and would not have gone on developing for more 
than thirty years. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4757  
 
LECTURE XXXV 
 
THE QUESTION OF A WELTANSCHAUUNG 
 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - At our last meeting we were occupied with little everyday concerns - putting 
our own modest house in order, as it were. I propose that we should now take a bold leap and venture upon 
answering a question which is constantly being asked in other quarters: does psycho-analysis lead to a particular Weltanschauung and, if so, to which? 
   ‘Weltanschauung’ is, I am afraid, a specifically German concept, the translation of which into foreign 
languages might well raise difficulties. If I try to give you a definition of it, it is bound to seem clumsy to you. In my opinion, then, a Weltanschauung is an intellectual construction which solves all the problems of our 
existence uniformly on the basis of one overriding hypothesis, which, accordingly, leaves no question 
unanswered and in which everything that interests us finds its fixed place. It will easily be understood that the possession of a Weltanschauung of this kind is among the ideal wishes of human beings. Believing in it 
one can feel secure in life, one can know what to strive for, and how one can deal most expediently with 
one’s emotions and interests. 
   If that is the nature of a Weltanschauung, the answer as regards psycho-analysis is made easy. As a 
specialist science, a branch of psychology - a depth-psychology or psychology of the unconscious - it is 
quite unfit to construct a Weltanschauung of its own: it must accept the scientific one. But the 
Weltanschauung of science already departs noticeably from our definition. It is true that it too assumes the 
uniformity  of the explanation of the universe; but it does so  only as a programme, the fulfilment of which is 
relegated to the future. Apart from this it is marked by negative characteristics, by its limitation to what is at the moment knowable and by its sharp rejection of certain elements that are alien to it. It asserts that there are no sources of knowledge of the universe other than the intellectual working-over of carefully scrutinized observations - in other words, what we call research - and alongside of it no knowledge derived from 
revelation, intuition or divination. It seems as though this view came very near to being generally 
recognized in the course of the last few centuries that have passed; and it has been left to our century to 
discover the presumptuous objection that a Weltanschauung like this is alike paltry and cheerless, that it 
overlooks the claims of the human intellect and the needs of the human mind.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4758  
 
   This objection cannot be too energetically repudiated. It is quite without a basis, since the intellect and the 
mind are objects for scientific research in exactly the same way as any non-human things. Psycho-analysis 
has a special right to speak for the scientific Weltanschauung at this point, since it cannot be reproached 
with having neglected what is mental in the picture of  the universe. Its contribution to science lies precisely 
in having extended research to the mental field. And, incidentally, without such a psychology science would 
be very incomplete. If, however, the investigation of the intellectual and emotional functions of men (and of 
animals) is included in science, then it will be seen that  nothing is altered in the attitude of science as a 
whole, that no new sources of knowledge or methods of research have come into being. Intuition and 
divination would be such, if they existed; but they  may safely be reckoned as illusions, the fulfilments of 
wishful impulses. It is easy to see, too, that these demands upon a Weltanschauung are only based on 
emotion. Science takes notice of the fact that the human mind produces these demands and is ready to examine their sources; but it has not the slightest reason to regard them as justified. On the contrary it sees 
this as a warning carefully to separate from knowledge everything that is illusion and an outcome of emotional demands like these.    This does not in the least mean that these wi shes are to be pushed contemptuously on one side or their 
value for human life under-estimated. We are ready to trace out the fulfilments of them which they have created for themselves in the products of art and in the systems of religion and philosophy; but we cannot nevertheless overlook the fact that it would be illegitimate and highly inexpedient to allow these demands to 
be transferred to the sphere of knowledge. For this would be to lay open the paths which lead to psychosis, 
whether to individual or group psychosis, and would withdraw valuable amounts of energy from endeavours which are directed towards reality in order, so far as possible, to find satisfaction in it for wishes and needs. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4759  
 
   From the standpoint of science one cannot avoid exercising one’s critical faculty here and proceeding 
with rejections and dismissals. It is not permissible to declare that science is one field of human mental 
activity and that religion and philosophy are others, at least its equal in value, and that science has no 
business to interfere with the other two: that they all have an equal claim to be true and that everyone is at 
liberty to choose from which he will draw his convictions and in which he will place his belief. A view of this 
kind is regarded as particularly superior, tolerant, broad-minded and free from illiberal prejudices. 
Unfortunately it is not tenable and shares all the pernicious features of an entirely unscientific 
Weltanschauung and is equivalent to one in practice. It is simply a fact that the truth cannot be tolerant, that 
it admits of no compromises or limitations, that research regards every sphere of human activity as 
belonging to it and that it must be relentlessly critical if any other power tries to take over any part of it.  
   Of the three powers which may dispute the basic  position of science, religion alone is to be taken 
seriously as an enemy. Art is almost always harmless and beneficent; it does not seek to be anything but 
an illusion. Except for a few people who are spoken of as being ‘possessed’ by art, it makes no attempt at invading the realm of reality. Philosophy is not opposed to science, it behaves like a science and works in 
part by the same methods; it departs from it, however, by clinging to the illusion of being able to present a 
picture of the universe which is without gaps and is coherent, though one which is bound to collapse with 
every fresh advance in our knowledge. It goes astray in  its method by over-estimating the epistemological 
value of our logical operations and by accepting other sources of knowledge such as intuition. And it often seems that the poet’s derisive comment is not unjustified when he says of the philosopher:  
   Mit seinen Nachtmützen und Schlafrockfetzen 
   Stopft er die Lücken des Weltenbaus. ¹ 
 
   ¹ Heine. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4760  
 
   But philosophy has no direct influence on the great mass of mankind; it is of interest to only a small 
number even of the top layer of intellectuals and is scarcely intelligible to anyone else. On the other hand, 
religion is an immense power which has the strongest em otions of human beings at its service. It is well 
known that at an earlier date it comprised everything that  played an intellectual part in men’s lives, that it 
took the place of science when there was scarcely yet such a thing as science, and that it constructed a 
Weltanschauung, consistent and self-contained to an unparalleled degree, which, although it has been profoundly shaken, persists to this day.    If we are to give an account of the grandiose nature of religion, we must bear in mind what it undertakes 
to do for human beings. It gives them information about the origin and coming into existence of the 
universe, it assures them of its protection and of ultimate happiness in the ups and downs of life and it directs their thoughts and actions by precepts which it lays down with its whole authority. Thus it fulfils three 
functions. With the first of them it satisfies the hum an thirst for knowledge; it does the same thing that 
science attempts to do with its  means, and at that point enters into rivalry with it. It is to its second function 
that it no doubt owes the greatest part of its influence.  Science can be no match for it when it soothes the 
fear that men feel of the dangers and vicissitudes of life, when it assures them of a happy ending and offers 
them comfort in unhappiness. It is true that science can teach us how to avoid certain dangers and that 
there are some sufferings which it can successfully combat; it would be most unjust to deny that it is a powerful helper to men; but there are many situations in which it must leave a man to his suffering and can 
only advise him to submit to it. In its third function, in which it issues precepts and lays down prohibitions 
and restrictions, religion is furthest away from science. For science is content to investigate and to establish facts, though it is true that from its application rule s and advice are derived on the conduct of life. In some 
circumstances these are the same as those offered by religion, but, when this is so, the reasons for them are different.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4761  
 
   The convergence between these three aspects of relig ion is not entirely clear. What has an explanation of 
the origin of the universe to do with the inculcation of  certain particular ethical precepts? The assurances of 
protection and happiness are more intimately linked with the ethical requirements. They are the reward for 
fulfilling these commands; only those who obey them may count upon these benefits, punishment awaits the disobedient. Incidentally, something similar is true of science. Those who disregard its lessons, so it 
tells us, expose themselves to injury. 
   The remarkable combination in religion of instruction, consolation and requirements can only be understood if it is subjected to a genetic analysis. Th is may be approached from the most striking point of 
the aggregate, from its instruction on the origin of the universe; for why, we may ask, should a cosmogony be a regular component of religious systems? The doctrine is, then, that the universe was created by a being resembling a man, but magnified in every respect, in power, wisdom, and the strength of his passions 
- an idealized super-man. Animals as creators of the universe point to the influence of totemism, upon 
which we shall have a few words at least to say presently. It is an interesting fact that this creator is always only a single being, even when there are believed to be many  gods. It is interesting, too, that the creator is 
usually a man, though there is far from being a lack of indications of female deities; and some mythologies 
actually make the creation begin with a male god getting rid of a female deity, who is degraded into being a 
monster. Here the most interesting problems of detail open out; but we must hurry on. Our further path is made easy to recognize, for this god-creator is undisguisedly called ‘father’. Psycho-analysis infers that he 
really is the father, with all the magnificence in which he once appeared to the small child. A religious man 
pictures the creation of the universe just as he pictures his own origin.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4762  
 
   This being so, it is easy to explain how it is that consoling assurances and strict ethical demands are 
combined with a cosmogony. For the same person to whom the child owed his existence, the father (or 
more correctly, no doubt, the parental agency compounded of the father and mother), also protected and watched over him in his feeble and helpless state, exposed as he was to all the dangers lying in wait in the external world; under his father’s protection he felt safe. When a human being has himself grown up, he 
knows, to be sure, that he is in possession of greater strength, but his insight into the perils of life has also 
grown greater, and he rightly concludes that fundamenta lly he still remains just as helpless and unprotected 
as he was in his childhood, that faced by the world he is still a child. Even now, therefore, he cannot do 
without the protection which he enjoyed as a child. But he has long since recognized, too, that his father is 
a being of narrowly restricted power, and not equipped with every excellence. He therefore harks back to 
the mnemic image of the father whom in his childhood he so greatly overvalued. He exalts the image into a 
deity and makes it into something contemporary and real. The effective strength of this mnemic image and 
the persistence of his need for protection jointly sustain his belief in God.    The third main item in the religious programme, the ethical demand, also fits into this childhood situation with ease. I may remind you of Kant’s famous pronouncement in which he names, in a single breath, the 
starry heavens and the moral law within us. However strange this juxtaposition may sound - for what have 
the heavenly bodies to do with the question of whether one human creature loves another or kills him? - it nevertheless touches on a great psychological truth. The same father (or parental agency) which gave the 
child life and guarded him against its perils, taught him as well what he might do and what he must leave undone, instructed him that he must adapt himself to certain restrictions on his instinctual wishes, and made him understand what regard he was expected to have for his parents and brothers and sisters, if he 
wanted to become a tolerated and welcome member of the family circle and later on of larger associations. 
The child is brought up to a knowledge of his social duties by a system of loving rewards and punishments, he is taught that his security in life depends on his parents (and afterwards other people) loving him and on their being able to believe that he loves them. All these relations are afterwards introduced by men 
unaltered into their religion. Their parents’ prohibitions and demands persist within them as a moral 
conscience. With the help of this same system of rewards and punishments, God rules the world of men. The amount of protection and happy satisfaction assigned to an individual depends on his fulfilment of the 
ethical demands; his love of God and his consciousness of being loved by God are the foundations of the 
security with which he is armed against the dangers of the external world and of his human environment. Finally, in prayer he has assured himself a direct influence on the divine will and with it a share in the divine 
omnipotence. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4763  
 
 
   I feel sure that while you have been listening to me you have been bothered by a number of questions 
which you would be glad to hear answered. I cannot undertake to do so here and now, but I feel confident that none of these detailed enquiries would upset our thesis that the religious Weltanschauung is 
determined by the situation of our childhood. That being so, it is all the more remarkable that, in spite of its 
infantile nature, it nevertheless had a precursor. Ther e is no doubt that there was a time without religion, 
without gods. This is known as the stage of animism. At  that time, too, the world was peopled with spiritual 
beings resembling men - we call them demons. All the objects in the external world were their habitation, or perhaps were identical with them; but there was no superior power which had created them all and 
afterwards ruled them and to which one could turn for protection and help. The demons of animism were for the most part hostile in their attitude to human beings, but it appears that human beings had more self-
confidence then than later on. They were certainly in a c onstant state of the most acute fear of these evil 
spirits; but they defended themselves against them by ce rtain actions to which they ascribed the power to 
drive them away. Nor apart from this did they regard themselves as defenceless. If they desired something 
from Nature - if they wished for rain, for instance - they did not direct a prayer to the weather-god, but they performed a magical act which they expected to influenc e Nature directly: they themselves did something 
which resembled rain. In their struggle against the powers of the world around them their first weapon was 
magic , the earliest fore-runner of the technology of to-day. Their reliance on magic was, as we suppose, 
derived from their overvaluation of their own intellectual operations, from their belief in the ‘omnipotence of thoughts’, which, incidentally, we come upon again in our obsessional neurotic patients. We may suppose that human beings at that period were particularly proud of their acquisitions in the way of language, which 
must have been accompanied by a great facilitation of thinking. They attributed magical power to words. 
This feature was later taken over by religion. ‘And God said "Let there be light!" and there was light.’ Moreover the fact of their magical actions shows that animistic men did not simply rely on the power of their 
wishes. They expected results, rather, from the per formance of an action which would induce Nature to 
imitate it. If they wanted rain, they themselves poured out water; if they wanted to encourage the earth to be 
fruitful, they demonstrated a dramatic performance of sexual intercourse to it in the fields.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4764  
 
   You know how hard it is for anything to die away when once it has achieved psychical expression. So you 
will not be surprised to hear that many of the utteranc es of animism have persisted to this day, for the most 
part as what we call superstition, alongside of and behind religion. But more than this, you will scarcely be 
able to reject a judgement that the philosophy of today has retained some essential features of the animistic mode of thought - the overvaluation of the magic of wo rds and the belief that the real events in the world 
take the course which our thinking seeks to impose on them. It would seem, it is true, to be an animism without magical actions. On the other hand, we may suppose that even in those days there were ethics of some sort, precepts upon the mutual relations of men; but nothing suggests that they had any intimate 
connection with animistic beliefs. They were probably the direct expression of men’s relative powers and of 
their practical needs.    It would be well worth knowing what brought about the transition from animism to religion, but you may 
imagine the obscurity which to-day still veils these primaeval ages of the evolution of the human spirit. It 
appears to be a fact that the first form assumed by religion was the remarkable phenomenon of totemism, the worship of animals, in whose train the first ethical commandments, the taboos, made their appearance. In a volume called Totem and Taboo , I once elaborated a notion which traced this transformation back to a 
revolution in the circumstances of the human family. The main achievement of religion as compared with animism lies in the psychical binding of the fear of demons. Nevertheless a vestige of this primaeval age, the Evil Spirit, has kept a place in the religious system. 
 
   This being the prehistory of the religious Weltanschauung let us turn now to what has happened since 
then and to what is still going on before our eyes. The scientific spirit, strengthened by the observation of 
natural processes, has begun, in the course of time, to treat religion as a human affair and to submit it to a 
critical examination. Religion was not able to stand up to this. What first gave rise to suspicion and scepticism were its tales of miracles, for they contradicted everything that had been taught by sober 
observation and betrayed too clearly the influence of the activity of the human imagination. After this its 
doctrines explaining the origin of the universe met wi th rejection, for they gave evidence of an ignorance 
which bore the stamp of ancient times and to which, thanks to their increased familiarity with the laws of nature, people knew they were superior. The idea that  the universe came into existence through acts of 
copulation or creation analogous to the origin of individual people had ceased to be the most obvious and self-evident hypothesis since the distinction betw een animate creatures with a mind and an inanimate 
Nature had impressed itself on human thought - a distinction which made it impossible to retain belief in the 
original animism. Nor must we overlook the influence of the comparative study of different religious systems 
and the impression of their mutual exclusiveness and intolerance.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4765  
 
   Strengthened by these preliminary exercises, the scientific spirit gained enough courage at last to venture 
on an examination of the most important and emotionally valuable elements of the religious 
Weltanschauung. People may always have seen, though it was long before they dared to say so openly, that the pronouncements of religion promising men prot ection and happiness if they would only fulfil certain 
ethical requirements had also shown themselves unworthy of belief. It seems not to be the case that there 
is a Power in the universe which watches over the well-being of individuals with parental care and brings all 
their affairs to a happy ending. On the contrary, t he destinies of mankind can be brought into harmony 
neither with the hypothesis of a Universal Benevolence nor with the partly contradictory one of a Universal 
Justice. Earthquakes, tidal waves, conflagrations, make no distinction between the virtuous and pious and 
the scoundrel or unbeliever. Even where what is in question is not inanimate Nature but where an individual’s fate depends on his relations to other people, it is by no means the rule that virtue is rewarded 
and that evil finds its punishment. Often enough the violent, cunning or ruthless man seizes the envied 
good things of the world and the pious man goes away empty. Obscure, unfeeling and unloving powers determine men’s fate; the system of rewards and punishments which religion ascribes to the government of the universe seems not to exist. Here once again is a reason for dropping a portion of the animistic theory 
which had been rescued from animism by religion. 
   The last contribution to the criticism of the religious Weltanschauung  was effected by psycho-analysis, by 
showing how religion originated from the helplessness of children and by tracing its contents to the survival 
into maturity of the wishes and needs of childhood. This  did not precisely mean a contradiction of religion, 
but it was nevertheless a necessary rounding-off of our knowledge about it, and in one respect at least it 
was a contradiction, for religion itself lays claim to a divine origin. And, to be sure, it is not wrong in this, 
provided that our interpretation of God is accepted. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4766  
 
   In summary, therefore, the judgement of science on the religious Weltanschauung is this. While the 
different religions wrangle with one another as to which of them is in possession of the truth, our view is that 
the question of the truth of religious beliefs may be left altogether on one side. Religion is an attempt to master the sensory world in which we are situated by means of the wishful world which we have developed 
within us as a result of biological and psychological necessities. But religion cannot achieve this. Its 
doctrines bear the imprint of the times in which they arose, the ignorant times of the childhood of humanity. 
Its consolations deserve no trust. Experience teaches us that the world is no nursery. The ethical demands 
on which religion seeks to lay stress need, rather, to be given another basis; for they are indispensable to 
human society and it is dangerous to link obedience to them with religious faith. If we attempt to assign the 
place of religion in the evolution of mankind, it appears not as a permanent acquisition but as a counterpart to the neurosis which individual civilized men have to go through in their passage from childhood to 
maturity. 
   You are of course free to criticize this description of mine; I will even go half way to meet you on this. What I told you about the gradual crumbling away of the religious Weltanschauung was certainly 
incomplete in its abbreviated form. The order of the different processes was not given quite correctly; the 
co-operation of various forces in the awakening of the scientific spirit was not followed out. I also left out of 
account the alterations which took place in the religious Weltanschauung itself during the period of its 
undisputed sway and afterwards under the influence of growing criticism. Finally, I restricted my remarks, 
strictly speaking, to one single form taken by religion, that of the Western peoples. I constructed an 
anatomical model, so to speak, for the purpose of a hurried demonstration which was to be as impressive as possible. Let us leave on one side the question of whether my knowledge would in any case have been 
sufficient to do the thing better and more completely. I am aware that you can find everything I said to you 
said better elsewhere. Nothing in it is new. But let me express a conviction that the most careful working-over of the material of the problems of religion would not shake our conclusions.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4767  
 
   The struggle of the scientific spirit against the religious Weltanschauung is, as you know, not at an end: it 
is still going on to-day under our eyes. Though as a rule psycho-analysis makes little use of the weapon of 
controversy, I will not hold back from looking into this dispute. In doing so I may perhaps throw some further light on our attitude to Weltanschauungen . You will see how easily some of the arguments brought forward 
by the supporters of religion can be answered, t hough it is true that others may evade refutation. 
   The first objection we meet with is to the effect that it is an impertinence on the part of science to make religion a subject for its investigations, for religion is something sublime, superior to any operation of the human intellect, something which may not be approached with hair-splitting criticisms. In other words, 
science is not qualified to judge religion: it is quite serviceable and estimable otherwise, so long as it keeps 
to its own sphere. But religion is not its sphere, and it has no business there. If we do not let ourselves be put off by this brusque repulse and enquire further what is the basis of this claim to a position exceptional 
among all human concerns, the reply we receive (if we are thought worthy of any reply) is that religion 
cannot be measured by human measurements, for it is of divine origin and was given us as a revelation by a Spirit which the human spirit cannot comprehend. One would have thought that there was nothing earlier than the refutation of this argument: it is a clear case of petitio principii, of ‘begging the question’ - I know of 
no good German equivalent expression. The actual question raised is whether there is a divine spirit and a 
revelation by it; and the matter is certainly not deci ded by saying that this question cannot be asked, since 
the deity may not be put in question. The position here is what it occasionally is during the work of analysis. 
If a usually sensible patient rejects some particula r suggestion on specially foolish grounds, this logical 
weakness is evidence of the existence of a specially strong motive for the denial - a motive which can only 
be of an affective nature, an emotional tie. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4768  
 
   We may also be given another answer, in which a motive of this kind is openly admitted: religion may not 
be critically examined because it is the highest, most pr ecious, and most sublime thing that the human spirit 
has produced, because it gives expression to the deepest feelings and alone makes the world tolerable and 
life worthy of men. We need not reply by disputing this  estimate of religion but by drawing attention to 
another matter. What we do is to emphasize the fact that what is in question is not in the least an invasion 
of the field of religion by the scientific spirit, but on the contrary an invasion by religion of the sphere of 
scientific thought. Whatever may be the value and importance of religion, it has no right in any way to restrict thought - no right, therefore, to exclude itself from having thought applied to it. 
   Scientific thinking does not differ in its nature from the normal activity of thought, which all of us, believers 
and unbelievers, employ in looking after our affairs in ordinary life. It has only developed certain features: it takes an interest in things even if they have no immedi ate, tangible use; it is concerned carefully to avoid 
individual factors and affective influences; it examines more strictly the trustworthiness of the sense-perceptions on which it bases its conclusions; it pr ovides itself with new perceptions which cannot be 
obtained by everyday means and it isolates the det erminants of these new experiences in experiments 
which are deliberately varied. Its endeavour is to arrive at correspondence with reality - that is to say, with 
what exists outside us and independently of us and, as  experience has taught us, is decisive for the 
fulfilment or disappointment of our wishes. This corres pondence with the real external world we call ‘truth’. 
It remains the aim of scientific work even if we leave the practical value of that work out of account. When, therefore, religion asserts that it can take the place of science, that, because it is beneficent and elevating, 
it must also be true, that is in fact an invasion which must be repulsed in the most general interest. It is asking a great deal of a person who has learnt to conduct his ordinary affairs in accordance with the rules 
of experience and with a regard to reality, to suggest t hat he shall hand over the care of what are precisely 
his most intimate interests to an agency which claims as its privilege freedom from the precepts of rational 
thinking. And as regards the protection which religion promises its believers, I think none of us would be so much as prepared to enter a motor-car if its driver announced that he drove, unperturbed by traffic 
regulations, in accordance with the impulses of his soaring imagination. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4769  
 
   The prohibition against thought issued by religion to assist in its self-preservation is also far from being 
free from danger either for the individual or for human society. Analytic experience has taught us that a 
prohibition like this, even if it is originally limited to a particular field, tends to widen out and thereafter to become the cause of severe inhibitions in the subject’s conduct of life. This result may be observed, too, in 
the female sex, following from their being forbidden to have anything to do with their sexuality even in 
thought. Biography is able to point to the damage done by the religious inhibition of thought in the life 
stories of nearly all eminent individuals in the past. On the other hand intellect - or let us call it by the name that is familiar to us, reason - is among the powers which we may most expect to exercise a unifying 
influence on men - on men who are held together with such difficulty and whom it is therefore scarcely 
possible to rule. It may be imagined how impossible human society would be, merely if everyone had his own multiplication table and his own private units of length and weight. Our best hope for the future is that 
intellect - the scientific spirit, reason - may in process of time establish a dictatorship in the mental life of man. The nature of reason is a guarantee that afterwards it will not fail to give man’s emotional impulses and what is determined by them the position they des erve. But the common compulsion exercised by such 
a dominance of reason will prove to be the strongest uniting bond among men and lead the way to further 
unions. Whatever, like religion’s prohibition against thought, opposes such a development, is a danger for 
the future of mankind.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4770  
 
   It may then be asked why religion does not put an end to this dispute which is so hopeless for it by frankly 
declaring: ‘It is a fact that I cannot give you what is commonly called "truth"; if you want that, you must keep 
to science. But what I have to offer you is something incomparably more beautiful, more consoling and 
more uplifting than anything you could get from science. A nd because of that, I say to you that it is true in 
another, higher sense.’ It is easy to find the answer to this. Religion cannot make this admission because it 
would involve its forfeiting all its influence on the mass of mankind. The ordinary man only knows one kind 
of truth, in the ordinary sense of the word. He cannot  imagine what a higher or a highest truth may be. Truth 
seems to him no more capable of comparative degrees than death; and he cannot join in the leap from the 
beautiful to the true. Perhaps you will think as I do that he is right in this. 
   So the struggle is not at an end. The supporters of the religious Weltanschauung act upon the ancient 
dictum: the best defence is attack. ‘What’, they ask,  ‘is this science which presumes to disparage our 
religion - our religion which has brought salvation and consolation to millions of people over many thousands of years? What has it accomplished so far? What can we expect from it in the future? On its own admission it is incapable of bringing consolation and exaltation. Let us leave them on one side then, though 
that is no light renunciation. But what about its theories? Can it tell us how the universe came about and 
what fate lies before it? Can it even draw us a coherent picture of the universe, or show us where we are to 
look for the unexplained phenomena of life or how the forces of the mind are able to act upon inert matter? If it could do this we should not refuse it our respect. But none of these, no problem of this kind, has been 
solved by it hitherto. It gives us fragments of alleged discovery, which it cannot bring into harmony with one 
another; it collects observations of uniformities in the course of events which it dignifies with the name of laws and submits to its risky interpretations. And consider the small degree of certainty which it attaches to 
its findings! Everything it teaches is only provisionally tr ue: what is praised to-day as the highest wisdom will 
be rejected to-morrow and replaced by something else, though once more only tentatively. The latest error 
is then described as the truth. And for this truth we are to sacrifice our highest good!’   
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4771  
 
   I expect, Ladies and Gentlemen, that, in so far as you yourselves are supporters of the scientific 
Weltanschauung which is attacked in these words, you will not be too profoundly shaken by this criticism. 
And here I should like to recall to you a remark that once went the rounds in Imperial Austria. The old gentleman once shouted at the Committee of a parliamentar y party that was troublesome to him: ‘This isn’t 
ordinary opposition any more! It’s factious  opposition!’ Similarly, as you will recognize, the reproaches 
against science for not having yet solved the problems of the universe are exaggerated in an unjust and malicious manner; it has truly not had time enough yet for these great achievements. Science is very young - a human activity which developed late. Let us bear in mind, to select only a few dates, that only some 
three hundred years have passed since Kepler discovered the laws of planetary movement, that the life of 
Newton, who analysed light into the colours of the s pectrum and laid down the theory of gravitation, ended 
in 1727 - that is to say, little more than two hundred years ago - and that Lavoisier discovered oxygen 
shortly before the French Revolution. The life of an individual is very short in comparison with the duration 
of human evolution; I may be a very old man to-day, but nevertheless I was already alive when Darwin published his book on the origin of species. In the same year as that, 1859, Pierre Curie, the discoverer of radium, was born. And if you go further back, to the beginnings of exact science among the Greeks, to 
Archimedes, to Aristarchus of Samos (about 250 B.C.) who was the fore-runner of Copernicus, or even to 
the first beginnings of astronomy among the Babylonians, you will only have covered a small fraction of the length of time which anthropologists require for the evolution of man from an ape-like ancestral form, and 
which certainly comprises more than a hundred thousand years. And we must not forget that the last 
century has brought such a wealth of new discoveries, such a great acceleration of scientific advance that we have every reason to view the future of science with confidence. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4772  
 
   We must admit to some extent the correctness of  the other criticisms. The path of science is indeed slow, 
hesitating, laborious. This fact cannot be denied or altered. No wonder the gentlemen in the other camp are 
dissatisfied. They are spoilt: revelation gave them an easier time. Progress in scientific work is just as it is in an analysis. We bring expectations with us into the work, but they must be forcibly held back. By observation, now at one point and now at another, we come upon something new; but to begin with the 
pieces do not fit together. We put forward conjectures, we construct hypotheses, which we withdraw if they 
are not confirmed, we need much patience and readiness for any eventuality, we renounce early convictions so as not to be led by them into ov erlooking unexpected factors, and in the end our whole 
expenditure of effort is rewarded, the scattered findings fit themselves together, we get an insight into a whole section of mental events, we have completed our task and now we are free for the next one. In analysis, however, we have to do without the assistance afforded to research by experiment. 
   Moreover, there is a good deal of exaggeration in this  criticism of science. It is not true that it staggers 
blindly from one experiment to another, that it replaces one error by another. It works as a rule like a 
sculptor at his clay model, who tirelessly alters his rough sketch, adds to it and takes away from it, till he has arrived at what he feels is a satisfactory degr ee of resemblance to the object he sees or imagines. 
Besides, at least in the older and more mature sciences, there is even to-day a solid ground-work which is only modified and improved but no longer demolished. Things are not looking so bad in the business of science. 
   And what, finally, is the aim of these passionate disparagements of science? In spite of its present 
incompleteness and of the difficulties attaching to it, it remains indispensable to us and nothing can take its place. It is capable of undreamt-of improvements, whereas the religious Weltanschauung is not. This is 
complete in all essential respects; if it was a mistake, it must remain one for ever. No belittlement of science can in any way alter the fact that it is attempting to take account of our dependence on the real external world, while religion is an illusion and it derives its strength from its readiness to fit in with our instinctual wishful impulses. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4773  
 
 
   I am under an obligation to go on to consider other Weltanschauungen  which are in opposition to the 
scientific one; but I do so unwillingly, for I know that I am not properly competent to judge them. So you 
must bear this proviso in mind in listening to the following remarks, and if your interest has been aroused you should seek better instruction elsewhere. 
   And here I must first mention the various systems of philosophy which have ventured to draw a picture of 
the universe as it is reflected in the mind of thinkers who were for the most part turned away from the world. 
But I have already attempted to give a general account of the characteristics of philosophy and I am 
probably as unqualified as few people have ever been to form an estimate of the different systems. So I will 
invite you to join me in turning to a consideration of two other phenomena which, particularly in our days, it is impossible to disregard. 
 
   The first of these Weltanschauungen  is as it were a counterpart to political anarchism, and is perhaps a 
derivative of it. There have certainly been intellectual nihilists of this kind in the past, but just now the relativity theory of modern physics seems to have gone to their head. They start out from science, indeed, 
but they contrive to force it into self-abrogation, into suicide; they set it the task of getting itself out of the 
way by refuting its own claims. One often has an impression in this connection that this nihilism is only a 
temporary attitude which is to be retained until this task has been performed. Once science has been 
disposed of, the space vacated may be filled by some kind of mysticism or, indeed, by the old religious 
Weltanschauung. According to the anarchist theory there is no such thing as truth, no assured knowledge 
of the external world. What we give out as being scient ific truth is only the product of our own needs as they 
are bound to find utterance under changing external conditions: once again, they are illusion. Fundamentally, we find only what we need and see only what we want to see. We have no other possibility. Since the criterion of truth - correspondence with the external world - is absent, it is entirely a matter of indifference what opinions we adopt. All of them are equally true and equally false. And no one has a right 
to accuse anyone else of error. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4774  
 
   A person of an epistemological bent might find it te mpting to follow the paths- the sophistries - by which 
the anarchists succeed in enticing such conclusions from science. No doubt we should come upon 
situations similar to those derived from the familia r paradox of the Cretan who says that all Cretans are 
liars. But I have neither the desire nor the capacity for going into this more deeply. All I can say is that the anarchist theory sounds wonderfully superior so long as it relates to opinions about abstract things: it 
breaks down with its first step into practical life. Now the actions of men are governed by their opinions, 
their knowledge; and it is the same scientific spirit that  speculates about the structure of atoms or the origin 
of man and that plans the construction of a bridge capable of bearing a load. If what we believe were really 
a matter of indifference, if there were no such thing as knowledge distinguished among our opinions by 
corresponding to reality, we might build bridges just as well out of cardboard as out of stone, we might inject our patients with a decagram of morphine instead of a centigram, and might use tear-gas as a 
narcotic instead of ether. But even the intellectual anarchists would violently repudiate such practical 
applications of their theory.     The other opposition has to be taken far more seriously , and in this instance I feel the liveliest regret at 
the inadequacy of my information. I suspect that you know more about this business than I do and that you 
took up your position long ago in favour of Marxism or  against it. Karl Marx’s investigations into the 
economic structure of society and into the influence of different economic systems upon every department 
of human life have in our days acquired an undeniable authority. How far his views in detail are correct or 
go astray, I cannot of course tell. I understand that this is not an easy matter even for others better instructed than I am. There are assertions contained in Marx’s theory which have struck me as strange: 
such as that the development of forms of society is a process of natural history, or that the changes in 
social stratification arise from one another in the manner of a dialectical process. I am far from sure that I understand these assertions aright; nor do they sound to me  ‘materialistic’ but, rather, like a precipitate of 
the obscure Hegelian philosophy in whose school Marx graduated. I do not know how I can shake off my 
lay opinion that the class structure of society goes back to the struggles which, from the beginning of 
history, took place between human hordes only slightly differing from each other. Social distinctions, so I thought, were originally distinctions between clans or races. Victory was decided by psychological factors, 
such as the amount of constitutional aggressiveness, but also by the firmness of the organization within the 
horde, and by material factors, such as the possession of superior weapons. Living together in the same area, the victors became the masters and the vanquished the slaves. There is no sign to be seen in this of 
a natural law or of a conceptual evolution. On the other hand the influence exercised upon the social 
relations of mankind by progressive control over the forces of Nature is unmistakable. For men always put 
their newly acquired instruments of power at the service of their aggressiveness and use them against one 
another. The introduction of metals - bronze and iron - made an end to whole epochs of civilization and their social institutions. I really believe that it was gunpowder and fire-arms that abolished chivalry and aristocratic rule, and that the Russian despotism was already doomed before it lost the War, because no amount of inbreeding among the ruling families of Eu rope could have produced a race of Tsars capable of 
withstanding the explosive force of dynamite.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4775  
 
   It is possible, indeed, that with our present economic crisis, following after the Great War, we are only 
paying the price of our latest tremendous victory over nature, the conquest of the air. That does not sound 
very illuminating, but the first links at least in the c hain are clearly recognizable. English politics were based 
on the security which was guaranteed by the seas that washed her coasts. In the moment at which Blériot flew across the Channel in his aeroplane this protective isolation was breached; and in the night during 
which (in peace-time and on an exercise) a German Zeppelin cruised over London the war against 
Germany was no doubt a foregone conclusion.¹ Nor must the U-boat threat be forgotten in this connection.    I am almost ashamed to comment to you on a subject of such importance and complexity with these few 
inadequate remarks, and I know too that I have told you nothing that is new to you. I merely want to draw 
your attention to the fact that the relation of mankind to their control over Nature, from which they derive their weapons for fighting their fellow-men, must necessarily also affect their economic arrangements. We 
seem to have come a long way from the problem of a Weltanschauung, but we shall very soon be back to 
it. The strength of Marxism clearly lies, not in its view of history or the prophecies of the future that are 
based on it, but in its sagacious indication of the decisive influence which the economic circumstances of men have upon their intellectual, ethical and artistic attitudes. A number of connections and implications 
were thus uncovered, which had previously been almost totally overlooked. But it cannot be assumed that 
economic motives are the only ones that determine the behaviour of human beings in society. The undoubted fact that different individuals, races and nations behave differently under the same economic 
conditions is alone enough to show that economic motives are not the sole dominating factors. It is 
altogether incomprehensible how psychological factors can be overlooked where what is in question are the reactions of living human beings; for not only were t hese reactions concerned in establishing the economic 
conditions, but even under the domination of those conditi ons men can only bring their original instinctual 
impulses into play - their self-preservative instinct, their aggressiveness, their need to be loved, their drive towards obtaining pleasure and avoiding unpleasure. In an earlier enquiry I also pointed out the important claims made by the super-ego, which represents tradition and the ideals of the past and will for a time resist 
the incentives of a new economic situation. And finally we must not forget that the mass of human beings 
who are subjected to economic necessities also undergo the process of cultural development - of civilization as other people may say - which, though no doubt influenced by all the other factors, is certainly 
independent of them in its origin, being comparable to an organic process and very well able on its part to 
exercise an influence on the other factors. It displaces instinctual aims and brings it about that people become antagonistic to what they had previously tolerated. Moreover, the progressive strengthening of the 
scientific spirit seems to form an essential part of it. If anyone were in a position to show in detail the way in 
which these different factors - the general inherited human disposition, its racial variations and its cultural 
transformations - inhibit and promote one another under the conditions of social rank, profession and 
earning capacity - if anyone were able to do this, he would have supplemented Marxism so that it was 
made into a genuine social science. For sociology too, dealing as it does with the behaviour of people in 
society, cannot be anything but applied psychology. Strictly speaking there are only two sciences: 
psychology, pure and applied, and natural science. 
 
   ¹ I was told of this from trustworthy sources during the first year of the war. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4776  
 
   The newly achieved discovery of the far-reaching importance of economic relations brought with it a 
temptation not to leave alterations in them to the course of historical development but to put them into effect 
oneself by revolutionary action. Theoretical Marxism, as realized in Russian Bolshevism, has acquired the 
energy and the self-contained and exclusive character of a Weltanschauung, but at the same time an 
uncanny likeness to what it is fighting against. Though originally a portion of science and built up, in its 
implementation, upon science and technology, it has created a prohibition of thought which is just as 
ruthless as was that of religion in the past. Any critical examination of Marxist theory is forbidden, doubts of its correctness are punished in the same way as heresy was once punished by the Catholic Church. The 
writings of Marx have taken the place of the Bible and the Koran as a source of revelation, though they 
would seem to be no more free from contradictions and obscurities than those older sacred books.    And although practical Marxism has mercilessly cleared away all idealistic systems and illusions, it has 
itself developed illusions which are no less questionable and unprovable than the earlier ones. It hopes in 
the course of a few generations so to alter human nature that people will live together almost without friction in the new order of society, and that they will undertake the duties of work without any compulsion. Meanwhile it shifts elsewhere the instinctual restrictions which are essential in society; it diverts the 
aggressive tendencies which threaten all human communities to the outside and finds support in the 
hostility of the poor against the rich and of the hitherto powerless against the former rulers. But a transformation of human nature such as this is highly improbable. The enthusiasm with which the mass of 
the people follow the Bolshevist instigation at present, so long as the new order is incomplete and is 
threatened from outside, gives no certainty for a future in which it would be fully built up and in no danger. In just the same way as religion, Bolshevism too must compensate its believers for the sufferings and 
deprivations of their present life by promises of a better future in which there will no longer be any 
unsatisfied need. This Paradise, however, is to be in this life, instituted on earth and thrown open within a 
foreseeable time. But we must remember that the Jews as well, whose religion knows nothing of an after-life, expected the arrival of a Messiah on earth, and that  the Christian Middle Ages at many times believed 
that the Kingdom of God was at hand.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4777  
 
   There is no doubt of how Bolshevism will reply to these objections. It will say that so long as men’s nature 
has not yet been transformed it is necessary to make use of the means which affect them to-day. It is 
impossible to do without compulsion in their education, without the prohibition of thought and without the employment of force to the point of bloodshed; and if the illusions were not awakened in them, they could not be brought to acquiesce in this compulsion. And we should be politely asked to say how things could be 
managed differently. This would defeat us. I could think of no advice to give. I should admit that the 
conditions of this experiment would have deterred me and those like me from undertaking it; but we are not 
the only people concerned. There are men of action, unshakable in their convictions, inaccessible to doubt, 
without feeling for the sufferings of others if they stand in the way of their intentions. We have to thank men 
of this kind for the fact that the tremendous experiment of producing a new order of this kind is now actually 
being carried out in Russia. At a time when the great nations announce that they expect salvation only from 
the maintenance of Christian piety, the revolution in Ru ssia - in spite of all its disagreeable details - seems 
nonetheless like the message of a better future. Unluckily neither our scepticism nor the fanatical faith of 
the other side gives a hint as to how the experiment will turn out. The future will tell us; perhaps it will show that the experiment was undertaken prematurely, that a sweeping alteration of the social order has little 
prospect of success until new discoveries have increased our control over the forces of Nature and so 
made easier the satisfaction of our needs. Only then perhaps may it become possible for a new social order not only to put an end to the material need of the masses but also to give a hearing to the cultural demands 
of the individual. Even then, to be sure, we shall still have to struggle for an incalculable time with the 
difficulties which the untameable character of human nature presents to every kind of social community.  
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis4778  
 
 
   Ladies and Gentlemen, - Allow me in conclusion to sum up what I had to say of the relation of psycho-
analysis to the question of a Weltanschauung . Psycho-analysis, in my opinion, is incapable of creating a 
Weltanschauung of its own. It does not need one; it is a part of science and can adhere to the scientific Weltanschauung. This, however, scarcely deserves such a grandiloquent title, for it is not all-
comprehensive, it is too incomplete and makes no claim to being self-contained and to the construction of 
systems. Scientific thought is still very young am ong human beings; there are too many of the great 
problems which it has not yet been able to solve. A Weltanschauung erected upon science has, apart from 
its emphasis on the real external world, mainly negative traits, such as submission to the truth and rejection of illusions. Any of our fellow-men who is dissatisfied with this state of things, who calls for more than this for his momentary consolation, may look for it where he can find it. We shall not grudge it him, we cannot 
help him, but nor can we on his account think differently. 
 
New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis