REFLECTIONS ON WAR AND DEATH  
 
 
By 
 
 
PROFESSOR DR. SIGMUND FREUD, LL.D.  
 
 
 
 
Authorized English Translation By  
 
DR. A.A. BRILL and ALFRED B. KUTTNER1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MOFFAT, YARD AND COMPANY NEW YORK 1918  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright, 1918, by MOFFAT , YARD, AND COMPANY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This book is offered to the American public at the present 
time in the hope that it may contribute something to the cause of 
international understanding and good will which has become the 
hope of the world.  
      THE TRANSLATORS.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFLECTIONS ON WAR AND DEATH  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 REFLECTIONS ON WAR AND DEATH  
 
I 
 
THE DISAPPOINTMENTS O F WAR  
 
CAUGHT  in the whirlwind of these war times, without any real 
information or any perspective upon the great changes that have 
already occurred or are about to be enacted, lack ing all 
premonition of the future, it is small wonder that we ourselves 
become confused  as to the meaning of impressions which crowd 
in upon us or of the value of the judgments we are forming. It 
would seem as though no event had ever de stroyed so much of 
the precious heritage of mankind, confused so many of the clear -
est intellects or so t horoughly debased what is highest.  
Even science has lost her dispassionate impartiality. Her deep -
ly embittered vo taries are intent upon seizing her weapons to do 
their share in the battle against the enemy. The anthropologist has 
to de clare his opponent  inferior and degenerate, the psychiatrist 
must diagnose him as men tally deranged. Yet it is probable that 
we are affected out of all proportion by the evils of these times and 
have no right to compare them with the evils of other times 
through which we h ave not lived.  
      The individual who is not himself a com batant and therefore 
has not become a cog in the gigantic war machinery, feels con -
fused in his bearings and hampered in his  activities. I think any lit -
tle suggestion that will make it easier fo r him to see his way more 
clearly will be welcome. Among the factors which cause the stay - 
at-home so much spiritual misery and are so hard to endure there 
are two in particu lar which I should like to emphasize and discuss. 
I mean the disappointment that this war has called forth and the 
altered attitude towards death to which it, in common with other 
wars, forces us.  
When I speak of disappointment every body knows at once 
what I mean. One need not be a sentimentalist, one may real ize 
the biological and p hysiological neces sity of suffering in the 
economy of human life, and yet one may condemn the methods 
and the aims of war and long for its ter mination. To be sure, we 
used to say that wars cannot cease as long as nations live under 
such varied conditions , as long as they place such different values 
upon the individual life, and as long as the ani mosities which di -
vide them represent such powerful psychic forces. We were there -
fore quite ready to believe that for some time to come there would 
be wars betw een primitive and civilized nations and be tween those 
divided by color, as well as with and among the partly enlightened 
and more or less civilized peoples of Eu rope. But we dared to hope differently. We expected that the great ruling na tions of the 
white race, the leaders of man kind, who had cultivated world wide 
interests, and to whom we owe the technical progress in the 
control of nature as well as the creation of artistic and scientific 
cultural standards —we expected that these nations would find 
some other way of settling their differences and conflicting inter -
ests. 
Each of these nations had set a high moral standard to which 
the individual had to conform if he wished to be a mem ber of the 
civilized community.  
These frequently over strict precept s demanded a great deal of 
him, a great self -restraint and a marked renunciation of his im -
pulses. Above all he was forbidden to resort to lying and cheating, 
which are so extraordinarily useful in competition with others. 
The civilized state considered t hese moral standards the founda -
tion of its existence, it drastically interfered if any one dared to 
question them and often de clared it improper even to submit 
them to the test of intellectual criticism. It was therefore assumed 
that the state itself wou ld respect them and would do nothing that 
might contradict the foundations of its own existence. To be sure, 
one was aware that scattered among these civilized nations there 
were certain remnants of races that were quite universally disliked, 
and were ther efore reluctantly and only to a certain extent per -
mitted to partici pate in the common work of civilization where 
they had proved themselves suffi ciently fit for the task. But the 
great na tions themselves, one should have thought, had acquired 
sufficien t understanding for the qualities they had in common and 
enough tolerance for their differences so that, unlike in the days of 
classical antiq uity, the words “foreign ” and “hostile ” should no 
longer be synonyms.  
Trusting to this unity of civilized races c ountless people left 
hearth and home to live in strange lands and trusted their fortunes 
to the friendly relations existing be tween the various countries. 
And even he who was not tied down to the same spot by the exi -
gencies of life could combine all the advantages and charms of 
civilized countries into a newer and greater father land which he 
could enjoy without hin drance or suspicion. He thus took de light 
in the blue and the grey ocean, the beauty of snow clad mountains 
and of the green lowlands, the m agic of the north woods and the 
grandeur of southern vege tation, the atmosphere of landscapes up -
on which great historical memories rest, and the peace of un -
touched nature. The new fatherland was to him also a museum, 
filled with the treasure that all th e artists of the world for many 
centuries had created and left behind. While he wan dered from 
one hall to another in this museum he could give his impartial ap -
preciation to the varied types of perfec tion that had been de -
veloped among his distant compat riots by the mixture of blood, by history, and by the peculiarities of physical environment. Here 
cool, in flexible energy was developed to the high est degree, there 
the graceful art of beauti fying life, elsewhere the sense of law and 
order, or other qua lities that have made man master of the earth.  
We must not forget that every civilized citizen of the world had 
created his own special “Parnassus ” and his own “School of Ath -
ens.” Among the great philoso phers, poets, and artists of all 
nations he had sel ected those to whom he considered himself in -
debted for the best enjoyment and understanding of life, and he 
associated them in his homage both with the immortal ancients 
and with the familiar masters of his own tongue. Not one of these 
great figures seem ed alien to him just because he spoke in a dif -
ferent language; be it the incomparable explorer of human pas -
sions or the intoxicated wor shiper of beauty, the mighty and 
threaten ing seer or the sensitive scoffer, and yet he never re -
proached  himself with having become an apostate to his own 
nation and his beloved mother tongue.  
The enjoyment of this common civiliza tion was occasionally 
disturbed by voices which warned that in consequence of tradi -
tional differences wars were unavoidable even  between those who 
shared this civili zation. One did not want to believe this, but what 
did one imagine such a war to be like if it should ever come 
about? No doubt it was to be an opportunity to show the progress 
in man ’s community feeling since the days  when the Greek am -
phictyonies had forbidden the destruction of a city belonging to 
the league, the felling of her oil trees and the cutting off of her wat -
er supply. It would be a chivalrous bout of arms for the sole pur -
pose of estab lishing the superior ity of one side or the other with 
the greatest possible avoidance of severe suffering which could 
contribute nothing to the decision, with complete pro tection for 
the wounded, who must with draw from the battle, and for the 
physi cians and nurses who devo te themselves to their care. With 
every consideration, of course, for noncombatants, for the women 
who are removed from the activities of war, and for the children 
who, when grown up, are to become friends and co workers on 
both sides. And with the mainten ance, finally, of all the interna -
tional projects and institutions in which the civilized community of 
peace times had expressed its corporate life.  
Such a war would still be horrible enough and full of burdens, 
but it would not have interrupted the develo pment of ethical re -
lations between the large human units, between nations and states.  
But the war in which we did not want to believe broke out and 
brought —disap pointment. It is not only bloodier and more de -
structive than any foregoing war, as a result of the tremendous de -
velopment of weapons of attack and defense, but it is at least as 
cruel, bitter, and merciless as any earlier war. It places itself above 
all the restrictions pledged in times of peace, the so -called rights of nations, it does not ackn owledge the prerogatives of the wounded 
and of physicians, the distinction between peaceful and fighting 
members of the population, or the claims of private property. It 
hurls down in blind rage whatever bars its way, as though there 
were to be no future a nd no peace after it is over. It tears asunder 
all community bonds among the struggling peoples and threatens 
to leave a bitterness which will make impossible any reestablish -
ment of these ties for a long time to come.  
It has also brought to light the bare ly conceivable phenom -
enon of civilized na tions knowing and understanding each other 
so little that one can turn from the other with hate and loathing. 
Indeed one of these great civilized nations has become so uni -
versally disliked that it is even at temp ted to cast it out from the 
civilized community as though it were barbaric, al though this very 
nation has long proved its eligibility through contribution after 
contribution of brilliant achievements. We live in the hope that 
impartial history will furnish  the proof that this very nation, in 
whose language I am writing and for whose victory our dear ones 
are fighting, has sinned least against the laws of human civilization. 
But who is privileged to step forward at such a time as judge in his 
own defense?  
Races are roughly represented by the states they form and 
these states by the governments which guide them. The in dividual 
citizen can prove with dismay in this war what occasionally thrust 
itself upon him already in times of peace, namely, that the state 
forbids him to do wrong not because it wishes to do away with 
wrongdoing but because it wishes to monopolize it, like salt and 
tobacco. A state at war makes free use of every in justice, every act 
of violence, that would dishonor the individual. It employs not 
only permissible cunning but conscious lies and intentional decep -
tion against the enemy, and this to a degree which appar ently 
outdoes what was customary in pre vious wars. The state demands 
the ut most obedience and sacrifice of its citizens, but at  the same 
time it treats them as chil dren through an excess of secrecy and a 
censorship of news and expression of opinion which render the 
minds of those who are thus intellectually repressed de fenseless 
against every unfavorable situa tion and every wil d rumor. It ab -
solves itself from guarantees and treaties by which it was bound to 
other states, makes unabashed confession of its greed and as -
piration to power, which the individual is then supposed to sanc -
tion out of patri otism.  
Let the reader not obj ect that the state cannot abstain from the 
use of injustice because it would thereby put itself at a disadvan -
tage. For the individual, too, obedience to moral standards and 
abstinence from brutal acts of violence are as a rule very disad -
vantageous, and the state but rarely proves itself capable of in -
demnifying the individual for the sacrifice it demands of him. Nor is it to be won dered at that the loosening of moral ties between the 
large human units has had a pronounced effect upon the morality 
of the  individual, for our conscience is not the inexorable judge 
that teachers of ethics say it is; it has its origin in nothing but 
“social fear. ” Wherever the community suspends its reproach the 
suppression of evil desire also ceases, and men commit acts of 
cruelty, treachery, deception, and brutality, the very possibility of 
which would have been considered incompatible with their level 
of culture.  
Thus the civilized world -citizen of whom I spoke before may 
find himself helpless in a world that has grown stra nge to him 
when he sees his great fatherland disin tegrated, the possessions 
common to man kind destroyed, and his fellow citizens divided 
and debased.  
Nevertheless several things might be said in criticism of his dis -
appointment. Strictly speaking it is n ot justified, for it consists in 
the destruction of an illusion. Illusions commend themselves to us 
because they save us pain and allow us to enjoy pleasure instead. 
We must therefore accept it without complaint when they some -
times collide with a bit of reality against which they are dashed to 
pieces.  
Two things have roused our disappoint ment in this war: the 
feeble morality of states in their external relations which have in -
wardly acted as guardians of moral standards, and the brutal be -
havior of in dividuals of the highest culture of whom one would not 
have believed any such thing possible.  
Let us begin with the second point and try to sum up the view 
which we wish to criticise in a single compact statement. Through 
what process does the individual rea ch a higher stage of morality? 
The first answer will probably be: He is really good and noble 
from birth, in the first place. It is hardly necessary to give this any 
further consideration. The second answer will follow the sugges -
tion that a process of dev elopment is involved here and will 
probably assume that this de velopment consists in eradicating the 
evil inclinations of man and substituting good inclinations under 
the influence of educa tion and cultural environment. In that case 
we may indeed wonder that evil should appear again so actively in 
persons who have been educated in this way.  
But this answer also contains the theory which we wish to con -
tradict. In reality there is no such thing as “eradicating ” evil. Psy -
chological, or strictly speaking, p sychoanalytic investigation proves, 
on the contrary, that the deepest character of man consists of im -
pulses of an elemental kind which are similar in all human beings, 
the aim of which is the gratification of cer tain primitive needs. 
These impulses are i n themselves neither good or evil. We classify 
them and their manifestations ac cording to their relation to the 
needs and demands of the human community. It is conceded that all the impulses which so ciety rejects as evil, such as selfishness 
and cruelty,  are of this primitive nature.  
These primitive impulses go through a long process of de -
velopment before they can become active in the adult. They be -
come inhibited and diverted to other aims and fields,  they unite 
with each other, change their objects and in part turn against one ’s 
own person. The formation of reactions against certain impulses 
gives the deceptive appearance of a change of content, as if ego -
tism had become altruism and cruelty had changed into sympathy. 
The formation of these reactions is favored by the fact that many 
impulses appear almost from the beginning in contrasting pairs; 
this is a remarkable state of affairs called the ambivalence of fe el-
ing and is quite unknown to the layman. This feel ing is best ob -
served and grasped through the fact that intense love and intense 
hate occur so frequently in the same person. Psychoanalysis goes 
further and states that the two contrasting feelings not infrequently 
take the same person as their ob ject. 
What we call the character of a person does not really emerge 
until the fate of all these impulses has been settled, and character, 
as we all know, is very inade quately defined in terms of either 
“good ” or “evil.” Man is seldom entirely good or evil, he is “good ” 
on the whole in one re spect and “evil” in another, or “good ” un-
der certain conditions, and decidedly “evil” under others. It is in -
teresting to learn that the earlier infantile existence of in tense 
“bad” impulses is often the nec essary condition of being “good ” in 
later life. The most pronounced childish ego tists may become the 
most helpful and self -sacrificing citizens; the majority of idealists, 
humanitarians, and protectors of animals have  developed from 
little sadists and animal tormentors.  
The transformation of “evil” impulses is the result of two fact -
ors operating in the same sense, one inwardly and the other out -
wardly. The inner factor consists in influencing the evil or selfish 
impul ses through erotic elements, the love needs of man inter -
preted in the widest sense. The addition of erotic components 
transforms selfish impulses into social impulses. We learn to value 
being loved as an advantage for the sake of which we can re -
nounce ot her advantages. The outer factor is the force of educa -
tion which represents the de mands of the civilized environment 
and which is then continued through the direct influence of the 
cultural milieu.  
Civilization is based upon the renuncia tion of impulse grati-
fication and in turn demands the same renunciation of im pulses 
from every newcomer. During the individual ’s life a constant 
change takes place from outer to inner compulsion. The influ -
ences of civilization work through the erotic components to brin g 
about the transformation of more and more of the selfish tend -
encies into altruistic and social tendencies. We may indeed as -sume that the inner compulsion which makes itself felt in the de -
velopment of man was origin ally, that is, in the history of man kind, 
a purely external compulsion. Today peo ple bring along a certain 
tendency (dis position) to transform the egotistic into social im -
pulses as a part of their heredi tary organization, which then 
responds to further slight incentives to complete the t ransforma -
tion. A part of this trans formation of impulse must also be made 
during life. In this way the individual man is not only under the in -
fluence of his own contemporary cultural milieu but is also subject 
to the influences of his ances tral civiliz ation.  
If we call a person ’s individual capacity for transforming his 
egotistical impulses under the influence of love his cultural adapt -
ability, we can say that this consists of two parts, one congenital 
and the other acquired, and we may add that the re lation of these 
two to each other and to the untransformed part of the emotional 
life is a very variable one.  
In general we are inclined to rate the congenital part too 
highly, and are also in danger of over -valuing the whole cultural 
adaptability in its relation to that part of the impulse life which has 
remained primi tive, that is, we are misled into judging people to 
be “better ” than they really are. For there is another factor which 
clouds our judgment and falsifies the result in favor of what we are 
judging.  
We are of course in no position to ob serve the impulses of 
another person. We deduce them from his actions and his con -
duct, which we trace back to motives springing from his emotional 
life. In a number of cases such a conclusion is neces sarily incor -
rect. The same actions which are “good ” in the civilized sense may 
sometimes originate in “noble ” motives and sometimes not. Stu -
dents of the theory of ethics call only those acts “good ” which are 
the expression of good impulses and refuse to acknowl edge others 
as such. But society is on the whole guided by practical aims and 
does not bother about this distinction; it is satisfied if a man adapts 
his conduct and his actions to the precepts of civilization and asks 
little about his motives.  
We have hea rd that the outer compul sion which education 
and environment exercise upon a man brings about a fur ther 
transformation of his impulse life for the good, the change from 
egotism to al truism. But this is not the necessary or regular effect 
of the outer co mpulsion. Education and environment have not 
only love pr emiums to offer but work with profit premiums of an -
other sort, namely rewards and punishments. They can therefore 
bring it about that a person sub ject to their influence decides in fa -
vor of good c onduct in the civilized sense without any ennobling 
of impulse or change from egotistic into altruistic inclinations. On 
the whole the consequence remains the same; only special cir -
cumstances will re veal whether the one person is always good be -cause his  impulses compel him to be so while another person is 
good only in so far as this civilized behavior is of ad vantage to his 
selfish purposes. But our superficial knowledge of the individual 
gives us no means of distinguishing the two cases, and we shall c er-
tainly be mis led by our optimism into greatly over -estimating the 
number of people who have been transformed by civilization.  
Civilized society, which demands good conduct and does not 
bother about the im pulse on which it is based, has thus won over a  
great many people to civilized obedience who do not thereby fol -
low their own natures. Encouraged by this success, society has per -
mitted itself to be misled into putting the ethical demands as high 
as possible, thereby forcing its members to move still f urther from 
their emotional dispositions. A continual emotional sup pression is 
imposed upon them, the strain of which is indicated by the 
appearance of the most remarkable reactions and com pensations.  
In the field of sexuality, where such sup pression is  most dif -
ficult to carry out, it results in reactions known as neurotic ail -
ments. In other fields the pressure of civilization shows no path -
ological results but manifests itself in distorted characters and in 
the constant readiness of the in hibited imp ulses to enforce their 
gratifi cation at any fitting opportunity.  
Anyone thus forced to react continually to precepts that are 
not the expressions of his impulses lives, psychologically speak ing, 
above his means, and may be objec tively described as a hyp ocrite, 
whether he is clearly conscious of this difference or not. It is un -
deniable that our contem porary civilization favors this sort of hy -
pocrisy to an extraordinary extent. One might even venture to as -
sert that it is built upon such a hypocrisy and  would have to un -
dergo extensive changes if man were to undertake to live accord -
ing to the psychological truth. There are therefore more civilized 
hypocrites than truly cul tured pe rsons, and one can even discuss 
the question whether a certain amount of civilized hypocrisy is not 
indispensable to maintain civilization because the already organ -
ized cultural adaptability of the man of today would perhaps not 
suffice for the task of living according to the truth. On the other 
hand the maintenance of civiliz ation even on such questionable 
grounds offers the prospect that with every new generation a more 
extensive transforma tion of impulses will pave the way for a better 
civilization.  
These discussions have already afforded us the consolation 
that our mortif ication and painful disappointment on account of 
the uncivilized behavior of our fellow world citizens in this war 
were not justi fied. They rested upon an illusion to which we had 
succumbed. In reality they have not sunk as deeply as we feared 
because the y never really rose as high as we had believed. The fact 
that states and races abolished their mutual ethical re strictions not 
unnaturally incited them to withdraw for a time from the existing pressure of civilization and to sanction a passing gratificati on of 
their suppressed impulses. In doing so their relative mo rality with -
in their own national life prob ably suffered no rupture.  
But we can still further deepen our understanding of the 
change which this war has brought about in our former com pa-
triots and at the same time take warn ing not to be unjust to them. 
For psychic evolution shows a peculiarity which is not found in 
any other process of develop ment. When a town becomes a city 
or a child grows into a man, town and child disappear in the city 
and in the man.  Only memory can sketch in the old fea tures in 
the new picture; in reality the old materials and forms have been 
replaced by new ones. It is different in the case of psychic evo -
lution. One can describe this unique state of affairs only by s aying 
that every previous stage of development is preserved next to the 
following one [which has evolved  from it] ; the succession stipu lates 
a co-existence although the material in which the whole series of 
changes has taken place remains the same.  
The ea rlier psychic state may not have manifested itself for 
years but neverthe less continues to exist to the extent that it may 
some day again become the form in which psychic forces express 
themselves, in fact the only form, as though all subse quent de -
velop ments had been annulled and made regressive. This extra -
ordinary plasticity of psychic development is not without limits as 
to its direction; one can describe it as a special capacity for retro -
grade action or regression, for it some times happens that a l ater 
and higher stage of development that has been abandoned cannot 
be attained again. But the primi tive conditions can always be re -
constructed; the primitive psyche is in the strictest sense in -
destructible.  
The so -called mental diseases must make the impression on 
the layman of mental and psychic life fallen into decay. In reality 
the destruction concerns only later acquisitions and developments. 
The na ture of mental diseases consists in the re turn to former 
states of the affective life and function.  An excellent example of 
the plasticity of the psychic life is the  state of sleep, which we all 
court every night.  
Since we know how to interpret even the maddest and most 
confused dreams, we know that every time we go to sleep we 
throw aside our hard won morality like a garment in order to put it 
on again in the morning. This laying bare is, of course, harmless, 
becau se we are paralyzed and condemned to inactivity by the 
sleeping state.  
Only the dream can inform us of the re gression of our emo -
tional life to an earlier stage of development. Thus, for in stance, it 
is worthy of note that all our dreams are governed by purely ego -
tistic motives. One of my English friends once presented this 
theory to a scientific meeting in America, whereupon a lady  pre-sent made the remark that this might perhaps be true of Austrians, 
but she ven tured to assert for herself and her frie nds that even in 
dreams they always felt al truistically. My friend, although himself a 
member of the English race, was obliged to contradict the lady en -
ergetically on the basis of his experience in dream analysis. The 
noble Americans are just as egotisti c in their dreams as the Aus -
trians.  
The transformation of impulses upon which our cultural ad -
aptibility rests can therefore also be permanently or tem porarily 
made regressive. Without doubt the influences of war belong to 
those forces which can create s uch regressions; we therefore need 
not deny cultural adapti bility to all those who at present are acting 
in such an uncivilized manner, and may expect that the refinement 
of their impulses will continue in more peaceful times.  
But there is perhaps another  symptom of our fellow citizens of 
the world which has caused us no less surprise and fear than this 
descent from former ethical heights which has been so painful to 
us. I mean the lack of insight that our great est intellectual leaders 
have shown, their o bduracy, their inaccessibility to the most im -
pressive arguments, their uncritical cre dulity concerning the most 
contestable as sertions. This certainly presents a sad picture, and I 
wish expressly to emphasize that I am by no means a blinded par -
tisan wh o finds all the intellectual mistakes on one side. But this 
phenomenon is more easily explained and far less serious than the 
one which we have just considered. Students of human nature and 
philosophers have long ago taught us that we do wrong to value 
our intelligence as an in dependent force and to overlook its de -
pendence upon our emotional life. Ac cording to their view our in -
tellect can work reliably only when it is removed from the influ -
ence of powerful incitements; other wise it acts simply as an i nstru -
ment at the beck and call of our will and delivers the results which 
the will demands. Logical argumentation is therefore powerless 
against affective interests; that is why arguing with reasons which, 
according to Falstaff, are as common as blackberr ies, [is] so fruit -
less where our interests are concerned. Whenever possible psy -
choanalytic experience has driven home this assertion. It is in a 
position to prove every day that the cleverest people sud denly be -
have as unintelligently as defectives as soon as their understanding 
encounters emotional resistance, but that they regain their intel -
ligence completely as soon as this resistance has been over come. 
This blindness to logic which this war has so frequently conjured 
up in just our best fellow ci tizens, is therefore a sec ondary phe -
nomenon, the result of emo tional excitement and destined, we 
hope, to disappear simultaneously with it.  
If we have thus come to a fresh under standing of our es -
tranged fellow citizens we can more easily bear the disa ppoint ment 
which nations have caused us, for of them we must only make de -mands of a far more modest nature. They are per haps repeating 
the development of the in dividual and at the present day still ex -
hibit very primitive stages of development with a c orrespondingly 
slow progress towards the formation of higher unities. It is in keep -
ing with this that the educa tional factor of an outer compulsion to 
morality, which we found so active in the individual, is barely 
perceptible in them. We had indeed hope d that the wonderful 
community of interests established by intercourse and the ex -
change of products would result in the beginning of such a com -
pulsion, but it seems that nations obey their passions of the mo -
ment far more than their interests. At most th ey make use of their 
interests to justify the gratifi cation of their passions.  
It is indeed a mystery why the individ ual members of nations 
should disdain, hate, and abhor each other at all, even in times of 
peace. I do not know why it is. It seems as if  all the moral achieve -
ments of the individual were obliterated in the case of a large num -
ber of people, not to men tion millions, until only the most primi -
tive, oldest, and most brutal psychic inhibitions remained.  
Perhaps only later developments will s ucceed in changing 
these lamentable con ditions. But a little more truthfulness and 
straightforward dealing on all sides, both in the relation of people 
towards each other and between themselves and those who govern 
them, might smooth the way for such a ch ange.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 II 
 
OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS DEATH  
 
IT remains for us to consider the second factor of which I have 
already spoken which accounts for our feel ing of strangeness in a 
world which used to seem so beautiful and familiar to us. I refer to 
the disturbance in our former at titude towards death.  
Our attitude had not been a sincere one. To listen to us we 
were, of course, pre pared to maintain that death is the neces sary 
termination of life, that everyone of us owes nature his death a nd 
must be pre pared to pay his debt, in short, that death was natural, 
undeniable, and inevitable. In practice we were accustomed to act 
as if matters were quite different. We have shown an unmistakable 
tendency to put death aside, to eliminate it from li fe. We attempt -
ed to hush it up, in fact, we have the proverb: to think of some -
thing as  [one thinks]  of death , [meaning]  our own death , [na -
turally] . We cannot, indeed, imagine our own death; whenever we 
try to do so we find that we survive ourselves as s pectators. The 
school of psychoanalysis could thus assert that at bottom no one 
believes in his own death, which amounts to saying: in the uncon -
scious every one of us is convinced of his immortality.  
     As far as the death of another person is concern ed every man 
of culture will studiously avoid mentioning this possi bility in the 
presence of the person in question. Only children ignore this re -
straint; they boldly threaten each other with the possibility of 
death, and are quite capable of giving expre ssion to the thought of 
death in relation to the persons they love, as, for instance: Dear 
Mama, when unfor tunately, you are dead, I shall do so and so. 
The civilized adult also likes to avoid entertaining the thought of 
another ’s death lest he seem harsh  or unkind, unless his pro -
fession as a physician or a lawyer brings up the question. Least of 
all would he permit himself to think of some body ’s death if this 
event is connected with a gain of freedom, wealth, or position. 
Death is, of course, not deferr ed through our sensitiveness on the 
subject, and when it occurs we are always deeply affected, as if our 
expectations had been shattered. We regularly lay stress upon the 
unexpected causes of death, we speak of the ac cident, the  in-
fection, or advanced ag e, and thus betray our endeavor to debase 
death from a necessity to an accident. A large number of deaths 
seems unspeakably dreadful to us. We assume a special at titude 
towards the dead, something almost like admiration for one who 
has accom plished a ver y difficult feat. We suspend criticism of 
him, overlooking whatever wrongs he may have done, and issue 
the command, de mortuis nil nisi bene:  we act as if we were justi -
fied in singing his praises at the funeral oration, and inscribe only what is to his ad vantage on the tombstone. This consideration for 
the dead, which he really no longer needs, is more important to us 
than the truth and to most of us, certainly, it is more important 
than con sideration for the living.  
This conventional attitude of civilize d people towards death is 
made still more striking by our complete collapse at the death of a 
person closely related to us, such as a parent, a wife or husband, a 
brother or sister, a child or a dear friend. We bury our hopes, our 
wishes, and our desires w ith the dead, we are inconsolable and 
refuse to replace our loss. We act in this case as if we belonged to 
the tribe of the Asra who also die w hen those whom they love per -
ish.2 
But this attitude of ours towards death exerts a powerful 
influence upon our l ives. Life becomes impoverished and loses its 
interest when life itself, the highest stake in the game of living, 
must not be risked. It becomes as hollow and empty as an  Ameri -
can flirtation in which it is under stood from the beginning that no -
thing is t o happen, in contrast to a continental love affair in which 
both partners must always bear in mind the serious conse quences. 
Our emotional ties, the unbear able intensity of our grief, make us 
disin clined to court dangers for ourselves and those belongin g to 
us. We do not dare to contemplate a number of undertakings that 
are dangerous but really indispens able, such as aeroplane flights, 
expeditions to distant countries, and experiments with explosive 
substances. We are paralyzed by the thought of who is to replace 
the son to his mother, the husband to his wife, or the father to his 
children, should an acci dent occur. A number of other renunci -
ations and exclusions result from this ten dency to rule out death 
from the calculations of life. And yet the mot to of the Hanseatic 
League said: Navigare necesse est, vivere non necesse:  It is 
necessary to sail the seas, but not to live.  
It is therefore inevitable that we should seek compensation for 
the loss of life in the world of fiction, in literature, and in th e the -
ater. There we still find people who know how to die, who are 
even quite capable of killing others. There alone the condition for 
reconciling ourselves to death is fulfilled, namely, [that]  beneath all 
the vicissitudes of [living]  a permanent life st ill remains to us. It is 
really too sad that it may happen in life as in chess, where a false 
move can force us to lose the game, but with this difference, that 
we cannot begin a return match. In the realm of fiction we find the 
many lives in one for which  we crave. We die in identification with 
a certain hero and yet we outlive him and, quite unharmed, are 
prepared to die again with the next hero.  
It is obvious that the war must brush aside this conventional 
treatment of death. Death is no longer to be de nied; we are com -
pelled to believe in it. People really die and no longer one by one, 
but in large numbers, often ten thousand in one day. It is no long -er an accident. Of course, it still seems accidental whether a par -
ticular bullet strikes this man or t hat but the sur vivor may easily be 
struck down by a second bullet, and the accumulation of deaths 
ends the impression of accident. Life has indeed become inter -
esting again; it has once more received its full signifi cance.  
Let us make a division here and  separate those  who risk their 
lives in battle from those who remain at home, where they can on -
ly expect to lose one of their loved ones through injury, illness, or 
infection. It would certainly be very interesting to study the 
changes in the psychology of the combatants but I know too little 
about this. We must stick to the second group, to which we our-
selves belong. I have al ready stated that I think the confusion and 
paralysis of our activities from which we are suffering is essentially 
determined by the fact that we cannot retain our pre vious attitude 
towards death. Perhaps it will help us to di rect our psychological 
investigation to two other attitudes towards death, one of which we 
may ascribe to primitive man, while the other is still pre served, 
though invisible to our conscious ness, in the deeper layers of our 
psychic life.  
The attitude of  prehistoric man towards death is, of course, 
known to us only through deductions and reconstructions, but I 
am of the opinion that these have given us fairly trustworthy infor -
mation.  
Primitive man maintained a very curi ous attitude towards 
death. It is not at all consistent but rather contradictory. On the 
one hand he took death very se riously, recognized it as the termi -
nation of life, and made use of it in this sense; but, on the other 
hand, he also denied death and reduced it to nothingness. This 
contradiction was made possible by the fact that he maintained a 
radically different position in regard t o the death of others, a 
stranger or an enemy, than in regard to his own. The death of 
another person fitted in with his idea, it signified the an nihila tion 
of the hated one, and primitive man had no scruples against bring -
ing it about. He must have been a very pas sionate being, more 
cruel and vicious than other animals. He liked to kill and did it as 
a matter of course. Nor need we at tribute to him the  instinct which 
restrains other animals from killing and devouring their own 
species.  
As a matter of fact the primitive history of mankind is filled 
with murder. The history of the world which is still taught to our 
children is essentially a series of race  murders. The dimly felt 
sense of guilt under which man has lived since archaic times, and 
which in many religions has been condensed into the assumption 
of a primal guilt, a hereditary sin, is prob ably the expression of a 
blood guilt, the burden of which  primitive man assumed. In my 
book entitled “Totem and Taboo, ” 1913, I have followed the 
hints of W. Robertson Smith, Atkinson, and Charles Darwin in the attempt to fathom the na ture of this ancient guilt, and am of 
the opinion that the Christian doctrine  of to day still makes it pos -
sible for us to work back to its origin.3 
If the Son of God had to sacrifice his life to absolve mankind 
from original sin, then, according to the law of retaliation, the re -
turn of like for like, this sin must have been an ac t of killing, a 
murder. Nothing else could call for the sacrifice of a life in ex -
piation. And if original sin was a sin against the God Father, the 
oldest sin of mankind must have been a patri cide—the killing of 
the primal father of the primitive human horde, whose memory  
picture later was transfigured into a deity.4 
Primitive man was as incapable of imag ining and realizing his 
own death as any one of us are today. But a case arose in which 
the two opposite attitudes towards death clashed and came into 
conflict with each other, with results that are both signi ficant and 
far reaching. Such a case was given when primitive man saw one of 
his own relatives die, his wife, child, or friend, whom he certainly 
loved as we do ours; for love cannot be much younge r than the 
lust for murder. In his pain he must have discovered that he, too, 
could die, an ad mission against which his whole being must have 
revolted, for everyone of these loved ones was a part of his own 
beloved self. On the other hand again, every suc h death was satis -
factory to him, for there was also something foreign in each one of 
these persons. The law of emotional am bivalence, which today 
still governs our emotional relations to those whom we love, cer -
tainly obtained far more widely in primitiv e times. The beloved 
dead had nevertheless roused some hostile feelings in primitive 
man just because they had been both friends and enemies.  
Philosophers have maintained that the intellectual puzzle 
which the picture of death presented to primitive man fo rced him 
to reflect and became the starting point of every speculation. I 
believe the philosophers here think too philosophi cally, they give 
too little consideration to the primary effective motive. I should 
therefore like to correct and limit the above a ssertion; primitive 
man probably triumphed at the side of the corpse of the slain ene -
my, without finding any occasion to puzzle his head about the 
riddle of life and death. It was not the intellectual puzzle or any 
particular death which roused the spirit  of inquiry in man, but the 
conflict of emotions at the death of be loved and withal foreign and 
hated per sons.  
From this emotional conflict psychology arose. Man could no 
longer keep death away from him, for he had tasted of it in his 
grief for the decea sed, but he did not want to acknowledge it, since 
he could not imagine himself dead. He therefore formed a com -
promise and concealed his own death but denied it the sig -
nificance of destroying life, a distinction for which the death of his 
enemies had give n him no motive. He invented spirits during his contemplation of the corpse of the person he loved, and his con -
sciousness of guilt over the gratification which mingled with his 
grief brought it about that these first created spirits were trans -
formed into  evil demons who were to be feared. The changes 
wrought by death suggested to him to divide the individual into 
body and soul, at first several souls, and in this way his train of 
thought paralleled the dis integration process inaugurated by death. 
The con tinued remembrance of the dead became the basis of the 
assumption of other forms of existence and gave him the idea of a 
future life after apparent death.  
These later forms of existence were at first only vaguely as -
sociated appendages to those whom death had cut off, and en -
joyed only slight esteem until much later times; they still betrayed 
a very meagre knowledge. The reply which the soul of Achilles 
made to Odysseus comes to our mind:  
 
Erst in the life on the earth, no less than a god  
we revered thee,  
  We the Achaeans; and now in the realm of the  
dead as a monarch  
Here thou dost rule; then why should death thus  
grieve thee, Achilles?  
Thus did I speak: forthwith then answering  
thus he addressed me.  
Speak not smoothly of death, I beseech, O  
famous  Odysseus,  
Better by far to remain on the earth as the  
thrall of another,  
E’en of a portionless man that hath means right  
scanty of living,  
Rather than reign sole king in the realm of the  
      bodiless phantoms.  
                   Odysseus XI, verse 484 -491  
                   Translated by H. B. Coterill.  
 
Heine has rendered this in a forcible and bitter parody:  
 
 The smallest living philistine,  
 At Stuckert on the Neckar  
 Is much happier than I am,  
 Son of Pelleus, the dead her o,  
 Shadowy ruler of the Underworld.5 
 
It was much later before religions man aged to declare this 
after-life as the more valuable and perfect and to debase our mor -
tal life to a mere preparation for the life to come. It was then only 
logical to prolong o ur existence into the past and to invent former 
existences, transmigrations of souls, and reincarnations, all with 
the object of depriving death of its meaning as the termination of 
life. It was as early as this that the denial of death, which we de -
scribe d as the product of conventional culture, orginated.       Contemplation of the corpse of the per son loved gave birth not 
only to the theory of the soul, the belief in immortality, and im -
planted the deep roots of the human sense of guilt, but it also cre -
ated the first ethical laws. The first and most impor tant prohibi -
tion of the awakening con science declared: Thou shalt not kill. 
This arose as a reaction against the gratifi cation of hate for the be -
loved dead which is concealed behind grief, and was gradually ex -
tended to the unloved stranger and finally also to the enemy.  
Civilized man no longer feels this way in regard to killing ene -
mies. When the fierce struggle of this war will have reached a de -
cision every victorious warrior will joyfully and without delay re -
turn home to his wife and children, undisturbed by thoughts of the 
enemy he has killed either at close quarters or with weapons op -
erating at a distance.  
     It is worthy of note that the primitive races which still inhabit 
the earth and who are certainly closer to primitive man than we, 
act differently in this respect, or have so acted as long as they did 
not yet feel the influence of our civilization. The sav age, such as 
the Australian, the Bushman, or the inhabitant of Terra del Fue -
go, is by no means a remorseless murderer; when he returns 
home as victor from the war path he is not allowed to enter his 
village or touch his wife until he has ex piated his war murders 
through lengthy and often painful penances. The explan ation for 
this is, of course, related to his superstition; the savage fears the 
avenging spirit of the slain. But the spirits of the fallen enemy are 
nothing but the ex pression of his evil conscience over his blood 
guilt; behind this superstition there lies concealed a bit of ethical 
delicacy of feeling which has been lost to us civilized beings.6 
Pious souls, who would like to think us removed from contact 
with what is evil and mean, will surely not fail to draw satisfactory 
conclusions in regard to the strength of the ethical impulses which 
have been implanted in us from these early and forcible murder 
prohibitions. Unfortun ately this argument proves even more for 
the opposite contention.  
Such a powerful inhibition can only be directed against an 
equally strong im pulse. What no human being desires to do does 
not have to be forbidden, it is self -exclusive. The very emphasis of 
the com mandment: Thou shalt not kill, makes it certain that we 
are descended from an endlessly long chain of generations of  mur-
derers, whose lo ve of murder was in their blood as it is perhaps 
also in ours. The ethical strivings of mankind, with the strength 
and significance of which we need not quarrel, are an acquisition 
of the his tory of man; they have since become, though unfortu -
nately in ve ry variable quantities, the hereditary possessions of 
people of today.  
Let us now leave primitive man and turn to the unconscious in 
our psyche. Here we depend entirely upon psycho analytic investi -gation, the only method which reaches such depths. The question 
is what is the attitude of our uncon scious towards death. In answer 
we say that it is almost like that of primitive man. In this respect, as 
well as in many others, the man of prehistoric times lives on, un -
changed, in our conscious.  
Our unconsc ious therefore does not be lieve in its own death; 
it acts as though it were immortal. What we call our uncon scious, 
those deepest layers in our psyche which consist of impulses, re -
cognizes no negative or any form of denial and re solves all contra -
dictions, so that it does not acknowledge its own death, to which 
we can give only a negative content. The idea of death finds abso -
lutely no acceptance in our impulses. This is perhaps the real se -
cret of heroism. The rational basis of heroism is dependent upo n 
the decision that one ’s own life cannot be worth as much as cer -
tain abstract common ideals. But I believe that instinctive or im -
pulsive heroism is much more frequently indepen dent of such 
motivation and simply defies danger on the assurance which ani -
mated  Hans, the stone -cutter, a character in Anzengruber, who al -
ways said to himself: Nothing can happen to me. Or that mo tiva-
tion only serves to clear away the hesi tations which might restrain 
the corre sponding heroic reaction in the uncon scious. Th e fear of 
death, which controls us more frequently than we are aware, is 
comparatively secondary and is usually the outcome of the con -
sciousness of guilt.  
On the other hand we recognize the death of strangers and of 
enemies and sentence them to it just as  willingly and unhesitatingly 
as primitive man. Here there is indeed a distinction which be -
comes decisive in practice. Our unconscious does not carry out 
the killing, it only thinks and wishes it. But it would be wrong to 
underestimate the psychic reality  so completely in comparison to 
the practi cal reality. It is really important and full of serious con -
sequences.  
In our unconscious we daily and hourly do away with all those 
who stand in our way, all those who have insulted or harmed us. 
The expression: “The devil take him, ” which so frequently crosses 
our lips in the form of an ill -humored jest, but by which we really 
intend to say, “Death take him, ” is a serious and forceful death 
wish in our unconscious. Indeed our uncon scious murders even 
for trifles ; like the old Athenian law of Draco, it knows no other 
punishment for crime than death, and this not without a certain 
consistency, for every injury done to our all -mighty and self -
glorifying self is at bottom a crimen laesae majestatis . 
     Thus, if we are to be judged by our unconscious wishes, we 
ourselves are nothing but a band of murderers, just like primi tive 
man. It is lucky that all wishes do not possess the power which 
people of primitive times attributed to them.7 For in the cross fire 
of mutual maledictions mankind would have perished long ago, not excepting the best and wisest of men as well as the most beau -
tiful and charm ing women.  
As a rule the layman refuses to believe these theories of psy -
choanalysis. They  are rejected as calumnies which can be ignored 
in the face of the assurances of consciousness, while the few signs 
through which the unconscious betrays itself to consciousness are 
cleverly overlooked. It is therefore in place here to point out that 
many thinkers who could not possibly have  been influenced by 
psychoanalysis have very clearly accused our silent thought of a 
readiness to ignore the murder prohibi tion in order to clear away 
what stands in our path. Instead of quoting many ex amples I have 
chosen one which is very famous. In his novel, Père Goriot,  Bal-
zac refers to a place in the works of J.J. Rousseau where this 
author asks the reader what he would do if, without leav ing Paris 
and, of course, without being discovered, he could kill an old 
mandarin in Peking, with great profit to himself, by a mere act of 
the will. He makes it possible for us to guess that he does not con -
sider the life of this dignitary very secure. “To kill your mandarin ” 
has be come proverbial for this secret readiness to kill, even on the 
part of people of today.  
     There are also a number of cynical jokes and anecdotes which 
bear witness to the same effect, such as the remark attrib uted to 
the husband: “If one of us dies I shall move to Paris. ” Such cynical 
jokes would  not be possible if they did not have an unavowed 
truth to reveal which we cannot admit when it is baldly and se -
riously stated. It is well known that one may even speak the truth 
in jest.  
A case arises for our consciousness, just as it did for primitive 
man, in which the two opposite attitudes towards death, one of 
which acknowledges it as the destroyer of life, while the other de -
nies the reality of death, clash and come into conflict. The case is 
identical for both, it consists of the death of one of our  loved ones, 
of a parent or a partner in wedlock, of a brother or a sister , of a 
child or a friend. These per sons we love are on the one hand a 
part of our inner possessions and a constituent of our own selves, 
but on the other hand they are also in part strangers and even 
enemies. Except in a few instances, even the tenderest and closest 
love relations also contain a bit of hostility which can rouse an un -
conscious death wish. But at the present day this ambivalent con -
flict no longer results in the devel opment of ethics and soul the -
ories, but in neuroses which also gives us a profound insight into 
the normal psychic life. Doctors who prac tice psychoanalysis have 
frequently had to deal with the symptom of over tender care for 
the welfare of relatives or with wholly unfounded self reproaches 
after the death of a beloved person. The study of these cases has 
left them in no doubt as to the significance of unconscious death 
wishes.  The layman feels an extraordinary horror at the possibility of 
such an emo tion and takes his aversion to it as a legiti mate ground 
for disbelief in the assertions of psychoanalysis. I think he is wrong 
there. No debasing of our love life is intended and none such has 
resulted. It is indeed foreign to our comprehension as well as t o 
our feelings to unite love and hate in this manner, but in so far as 
nature employs these contrasts she brings it about that love is al -
ways kept alive and fresh in order to safeguard it against the hate 
that is lurking behind it. It may be said that we owe the most 
beautiful unfolding of our love life to the reaction against this hos -
tile impulse which we feel in our hearts.  
Let us sum up what we have said. Our unconscious is just as 
inaccessible to the conception of our own death, just as much 
inclined to kill the stranger, and just as divided, or ambivalent 
towards the per sons we love as was primitive man. But how far we 
are removed from this primi tive state in our conventionally civil -
ized attitude towards death!  
It is easy to see how war enters into  this disunity. War strips 
off the later de posits of civilization and allows the primi tive man in 
us to reappear. It forces us again to be heroes who cannot believe 
in their own death, it stamps all strangers as enemies whose death 
we ought to cause or w ish; it counsels us to rise above the death of 
those whom we love. But war cannot be abolished; as long as the 
condi tions of existence among races are so varied and the 
repulsions between them are so vehement, there will have to be 
wars. The question then  arises whether we shall be the ones to 
yield and adapt ourselves to it. Shall we not admit that in our 
civilized attitude towards death we have again lived psychologically 
beyond our means? Shall we not turn around and avow the truth? 
Were it not better t o give death the place to which it is en titled 
both in reality and in our thoughts and to reveal a little more of 
our uncon scious attitude towards death which up to now we have 
so carefully suppressed? This may not appear a very high achieve -
ment and in some respects rather a step backwards, a kind of re -
gression, but at least it has the advantage of taking the truth into 
account a little more and of making life more bearable again. To 
bear life remains, after all, the first duty of the living. The illusi on 
becomes worthless if it disturbs us in this.  
We remember the old saying:  
 
Si vis pacem, para bellum.  
If you wish peace, prepare for war.  
 
     The times call for a paraphrase:  
 
Si vis vitam, para mortem.   
If you wish life, prepare for death.  NOTES  
                                                 
1 [Translation of “ Zeitgemässes über Krieg und Tod,” Imago , vol. IV, no. 1 (1915), pp. 1 -21].  
2 Compare Heine’s poem, “Der Asra,” Louis Untermeyer’s translation, p. 269, Henry Holt  
& Co., 1917.  
3 Totem and Taboo,  translated by Dr. A.A. Brill, Moffat, Yard & Co., 1913.  
4 Totem and Taboo,  Chapter IV.  
5 [“Der Scheidende”, one of Heine’s last poems.]  
6 Totem and Taboo, Chapter IV.  
7 See Totem and Taboo, Chapter III.  